Country: taiwan | Cutoff: 2025-08-25

[PRESS]
1) Putin, Modi and Erdoğan among leaders in China for talks with Xi — The Guardian (2025-08-31)
   URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/aug/31/putin-modi-erdogan-xi-china-talks
   Text:
     Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin have met on the sidelines of a showpiece summit in China that seeks to challenge US-led, western-dominated blocs and is being attended by the leaders of more than two dozen nations. The Chinese and Russian leaders, who are closely allied under what they have termed a “limitless” partnership, discussed Putin’s recent meeting with Donald Trump, according to a Kremlin official, who gave no further details. The bilateral meeting was one of several for Xi on Sunday, who is hosting the annual Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) summit in Tianjin. The SCO is a 10-member bloc of Eurasian nations, and the summit is also being attended by the leaders of 16 observer or “dialogue partner” nations. Xi personally welcomed several leaders including the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, and the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, before the delegates attended a formal reception. Xi told the welcome reception that in the past century there had been a “significant increase in instability, uncertainty and unpredictable factors”, and that the SCO had become an “important force in promoting the building of a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind”. Footage published by Russian state media showed Xi and Putin, who arrived in Tianjin with an entourage of senior politicians and business representatives, warmly greeting each other at a photocall before calling in an interpreter for a lengthy and animated conversation. Putin and several other attenders are expected to stay on for a military parade in Beijing on Wednesday to mark the 80th anniversary of the end of the second world war, which China refers to as the war of resistance against Japanese aggression. The North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, is also expected to attend. The Tianjin summit is the largest held by the bloc since it was formed in 2001. The SCO is a key part of Beijing’s push for stronger multilateral alternatives to western or US-led blocs such as Nato. Putin told the Chinese state news agency Xinhua on Saturday that the SCO meeting would “consolidate solidarity” among the Eurasian nations and “help shape a fairer multipolar world order”. The goal appears to have been helped by the upheaval brought by Trump’s tariff regime and other foreign policy moves. Modi and Xi’s meeting took place five days after Washington imposed punishing 50% tariffs on Indian goods due to Delhi’s purchases of Russian oil. It is Modi’s first visit to China in seven years, and comes amid efforts by China and India to rebuild trade ties and resolve long-running Himalayan border disputes. “We are committed to progressing our relations based on mutual respect, trust and sensitivities,” Modi said after meeting Xi. Xi said China-India ties could be “stable and far-reaching” if both sides focused on viewing each other as partners instead of rivals, state media reported. In a meeting with Erdoğan, Xi said China and Turkey should strengthen cooperation in the area of counter-terrorism, according to Chinese state media. Xi also met leaders of the Maldives, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, and the autocratic leader of Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko, a key ally of Putin. The bilateral talks were held at the Tianjin Guest House, an intimate venue surrounded by lush greenery. Large sections of Tianjin were closed to traffic and a significant police presence was deployed around the city. Lim Chuan-Tiong, a researcher with the Institute for Advanced Studies on Asia at the University of Tokyo, said Putin and Xi meeting again was a sign of the continuation of their “limitless” partnership, and closing ranks while both deal with a common foe – the US. “As long as the mutual opponent [US] has not been defeated, China and Russia’s off-limits cooperation will remain,” Lim said. “Their cooperation also serves to highlight a global order that exists beyond the United States.” Moscow’s claims over Ukraine and its full invasion in 2022, as well as Beijing’s claim over Taiwan and threats to invade, have further isolated both governments from western and other democracies. Russian analysts have said the Ukraine war is now a main pillar of the bilateral relationship and that Moscow would want know how Beijing would respond if the US were to ask it to put pressure on Russia to end the fighting. “The longer the war [on Ukraine] drags on, the more Russia will need China’s assistance, whether economically or other forms,” Lim said. “China also recognises that it is unlikely for Sino-US relations to return to their pre-2018 state and thus has no choice but to accept a close alignment with Russia.” Beijing purports to take a neutral stance on the Ukraine war but has become an economic lifeline for Russia, and Ukraine has accused it of providing direct aid to Moscow’s campaign. The two countries have separately increased joint military drills. A Chinese academic who spoke on condition of anonymity said Moscow had expected more support from its ally but Beijing had been at pains to avoid further punitive sanctions. “China says there is ‘no limit’ but in practice it hesitates, constantly looking over its shoulder, wary of pressure from the west, the EU and Nato. It has never really taken Russia seriously – and Russia saw through this long ago,” the academic said. Additional research by Lillian Yang

2) US appeals court rules most of Trump’s sweeping global tariffs illegal – as it happened — The Guardian (2025-08-30)
   URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2025/aug/29/cdc-robert-f-kennedy-jr-donald-trump-federal-reserve-lisa-cook-latest-us-politics-news-live-updates
   Text:
     This concludes our live coverage of the second Trump administration for the day. Here are the latest developments: A federal appeals court ruled that most of Donald Trump’s tariffs are illegal, but can stay in effect until 14 October, to give time for a supreme court appeal. Trump suggested that the court decision, which affirmed a lower court ruling in May, could spell the end of the United States of America, but added that he expects the supreme court to help him win. Charles Borges, chief data officer of the Social Security Administration, resigned after filing a whistleblower complaint alleging that more than 300 million Americans’ Social Security data was put at risk by staffers from Elon Musk’s so-called “department of government efficiency”, who uploaded sensitive information to an insecure cloud server. In 2014, Jim O’Neill, the former biotech investor and current deputy health secretary who was named acting director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week, suggested that the FDA should just let people use drugs before doing any research to show that they work. The Missouri governor, Mike Kehoe, has moved to help the Republican party gain an additional seat in Congress, calling a special legislative session to redraw congressional districts in his state. The homeland security secretary, Kristi Noem, fired two dozen “deep-state” employees of the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s information technology department, including its top leaders, following what she called an unspecified “breach” of its network by a “threat actor”. A federal appeals court in San Francisco blocked Noem from moving ahead with her plan to strip temporary protected status from 600,000 Venezuelans who have permission to live and work in the United States amid turmoil in their homeland. Charles Borges, chief data officer of the Social Security Administration, resigned on Friday due to what he called the agency’s actions against him since he filed a whistleblower complaint this week. In his complaint, Borges alleged that more than 300 million Americans’ Social Security data was put at risk by staffers from Elon Musk’s so-called “department of government efficiency” who uploaded sensitive information to a cloud account not subject to oversight. “I have suffered exclusion, isolation, internal strife, and a culture of fear, creating a hostile work environment and making work conditions intolerable,” Borges wrote in his resignation letter. The Project Government Accountability Office, which is representing him in his whistleblower case, posted the letter on its website. Borges’ attorney said he “no longer felt that he could continue to work for the Social Security Administration in good conscience, given what he had witnessed.” It added that he would continue to work with the proper oversight bodies. Edward Coristine, a 19-year-old software engineer, was among the Doge officials named by Borges as part of the project to duplicate Americans’ Social Security data and put it on an insecure server. It was Coristine’s recent beating, by two 15-year-olds on a Washington DC street, that Donald Trump used as a pretext for his federal takeover of the capital’s policing. Jim O’Neill, the former biotech investor and current deputy health secretary who was named acting director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week, might lack any experience in health care, but he does have a lot of opinions about the regulation of medicine as a business that could soon be very important. In 2014, when O’Neill was managing director of Mithril Capital Management, a “family of long-term venture capital funds” founded by Peter Thiel, he represented Thiel on the board of the SENS Research Foundation, an organization dedicated to finding treatments for aging, with Thiel’s financial support. That year, when O’Neill gave a talk at at the foundation’s “rejuvenation biotechnology” conference, he argued that development of drugs that might slow or reverse human aging was slowed down by the Food and Drug Administration’s efforts to ensure that drugs are safe and effective. Instead of making sure that drugs work before approving their use by the public, O’Neill said, the FDA should adopt of a system its proponents call “progressive approval”. “We should reform FDA, so that it is approving drugs after their sponsors have demonstrated safety and let people start using them, at their own risk, but not much risk of safety”, O’Neill said. “But let’s prove efficacy after they’ve been legalized”. O’Neill, who was standing in front of a slide on how much less efficient biotech startups were than software startups, taken from a book by Peter Thiel and Blake Masters, got a round of applause for the observation. As Jessica Hamzelou reported in the MIT Technology Review in June, O’Neill was suggesting that drugs be made available to the public “after the very first stage of clinical testing, which is designed to test whether a new treatment is safe. These tests are typically small and don’t reveal whether the drug actually works.” That idea is popular though in the longevity community that O’Neill’s patron Thiel is at the center of. It has also been proposed by O’Neill’s current boss, Robert F Kennedy Jr. In May, Kennedy told a longevity podcaster that he wanted to make it easier for people to experiment with treatments that might, or might not, work. “If you want to take an experimental drug … you ought to be able to do that”, Kennedy said. But ditching FDA’s gold-standard of phase 2 and phase 3 trials strikes others as unethical. “It’s just absurd to think that the regulatory agency that’s responsible for making sure that products are safe and effective before they’re made available to patients couldn’t protect patients from charlatans: Holly Fernandez Lynch, a professor of medical ethics and health policy at the University of Pennsylvania, told MIT Technology Review. “It’s just like a complete dereliction of duty.” Paul Krugman, the Nobel prize-winning economist, mocked Donald Trump, the Nobel prize-wanting president, for his hyperbolic claim, after a court ruled that his tariffs are almost all illegal, that “this Decision would literally destroy the United States of America” unless it is overturned. “Yep, this Decision would literally destroy the United States of America,” Krugman wrote on Substack. “Take away these tariffs, and the county will revert to the blasted wasteland it was on … April 1, just before Trump made his big tariff announcement.” Krugman added: It’s important to be clear what just happened. The court didn’t say that tariffs per se are illegal. It said that the procedure Trump used to impose tariffs — declaring an economic emergency, then setting tariff rates without so much as consulting Congress, let alone passing legislation — is illegal. If Trump wants to pass a tariff bill, the same way he passed his One Big Beautiful Bill, OK. (I mean, terrible policy, but legal.) But just saying “I am the Tariff Man, and here are my tariffs” isn’t OK. True, the International Economic Emergency Powers Act gives the president substantial room to set tariffs during an, um, economic emergency. But Trump himself keeps saying that the economy is in wonderful shape, booming without inflation, and any claims to the contrary are fake news. So how can things both be terrific and an emergency calling for drastic action? Donald Trump has said his tariffs are about winning. But in response to his appeals court setback on Friday, California governor Gavin Newsom declared: “Trump is America’s biggest loser.” Newsom and the state’s attorney general Rob Bonta have filed a separate lawsuit against Trump’s so-called “reciprocal” tariffs, which similarly argues the president lacks the authority to unilaterally impose levies through the IEEPA. That suit alleges that Trump’s global trade war has caused “immediate and irreparable harm” to the state – the world’s fourth largest economy. “And while Trump might be America’s biggest loser, it’s everyday Americans who are paying the price for his failed economic policies,” Newsom said. The Missouri governor, Mike Kehoe, has moved to help the Republican party gain an additional seat in Congress, calling a special legislative session to redraw congressional districts in his state. Kehoe’s announcement on Friday followed a pressure campaign from Donald Trump, who has urged Republican states to reshape district boundaries to more heavily favor Republicans, boosting the party’s chances of maintaining control of the House of Representatives in 2026, despite the unpopularity of his policies. The announcement came hours after Texas’s governor, Greg Abbott, signed into law a new congressional map designed to help Republicans gain five more House seats in next year’s elections without winning more votes. Trump has also pushed Indiana lawmakers to redraw that state’s maps, and has also pushed lawmakers in Florida and Ohio to help add three or more Republican-leaning seats. Trump celebrated what he called the prospect of “a new, much fairer, and much improved, Congressional Map, that will give the incredible people of Missouri the tremendous opportunity to elect an additional MAGA Republican in the 2026 Midterm Elections”. Democratic congressman Emanuel Cleaver, whose district, which includes part of Kansas City, might be redrawn to make his re-election unlikely, denounced the proposed new map as much less fair. “This attempt to gerrymander Missouri will not simply change district lines, it will silence voices. It will deny representation. It will tell the people of Missouri that their lawmakers no longer wish to earn their vote, that elections are predetermined by the power brokers in Washington,” Cleaver said in a statement. “Roughly 40% of Missourians cast their ballots for Democratic candidates last year, and they deserve representation in the People’s House just as much as our Republican neighbors.” The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee (DCCC) pointed to a proposal to create a new Republican majority seat by splitting heavily Democratic Kansas City. “Republicans are running scared, and they’ve decided their only hope for maintaining their majority is to pursue a cynical, unpopular scheme to gerrymander congressional maps,” Suzan DelBene, a Washington congresswoman who chairs the DCCC said. “The Missouri constitution, business and community leaders, and common sense all support the idea of Kansas City remaining one, compact congressional district. Donald Trump and DC Republicans’ desire to hold on to power are the only rationale for this re-draw.” The Liberty Justice Center, which filed a lawsuit in April to challenge Donald Trump’s so-called “Liberation Day” tariffs on behalf of five small businesses that would be damaged by the tariffs, issued a statement to celebrate what it called its second major victory in the case. The lawsuit was filed with the constitutional scholar Ilya Somin and joined by other lawyers, including Neal Katyal, former acting solicitor general of the United States during the Obama administration, after Trump administration appealed against his initial loss in the US court of international trade. “For the second time in this case, a federal court has held that the President’s so-called ‘Liberation Day’ tariffs are unlawful,” Jeffrey Schwab, director of litigation for the not-for-profit legal center said. “The President cannot lawfully impose tariffs on his own; and IEEPA does not give him unlimited unilateral tariff authority. This decision protects American businesses and consumers from the uncertainty and harm caused by these unlawful tariffs.” “The decision today is a powerful reaffirmation of our nation’s core constitutional commitments from our nation’s founders, especially the principle that presidents must act within the rule of law,” Katyal said. “It is that commitment to the rule of law that brought my parents, and millions of others, to this country, and which stands as a beacon of freedom and hope around the globe.” In an interview with MSNBC later on Friday, Katyal pointed out that Trump appeared to acknowledge during his first term that the constitution gave the power to impose tariffs to Congress. “He went and asked Congress for the authority to tariff and they said no. So President Trump this time around just did it on his own”, Katyal said. The US court of appeals for the federal circuit, which ruled on Friday that most of Donald Trump’s tariffs are illegal, will allow the import taxes to stay in effect until 14 October, to give the president time to appeal to the supreme court. After ruling, 7-4, that the so-called “reciprocal” tariffs imposed by Trump are not legal, the court paused its order until that date. Donald Trump broke his uncharacteristic silence on the news in recent days by posting an outraged reaction to the federal appeals court ruling that most of his tariffs are illegal. The president’s post, which was shared on an official White House account, began with the all-caps declaration: “ALL TARIFFS ARE STILL IN EFFECT!” The court ruling against Trump did say that the tariffs can remain in place until 14 October, giving his administration time to appeal to the supreme court. “Today a Highly Partisan Appeals Court incorrectly said that our Tariffs should be removed, but they know the United States of America will win in the end,” Trump added in his response. The president was quite clear about what he sees as the vehicle for bringing about his preferred end, being granted the power to impose taxes reserved in the US constitution for Congress. “For many years, Tariffs were allowed to be used against us by our uncaring and unwise Politicians,” Trump wrote. “Now, with the help of the United States Supreme Court, we will use them to the benefit of our Nation.” Donald Trump overstepped his presidential powers with most of his globe-rattling tariff policies, a federal appeals court in Washington DC ruled on Friday. US law “bestows significant authority on the president to undertake a number of actions in response to a declared national emergency, but none of these actions explicitly include the power to impose tariffs, duties, or the like, or the power to tax”, the court said. The court’s decision will likely mean that the supreme court will have to rule on whether Trump has the legal right as president to upend US trade policy. The court also said the ruling wouldn’t take effect until 14 October. Trump has claimed he has the right to impose tariffs on trading partners under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA), which in some circumstances grants the president authority to regulate or prohibit international transactions during a national emergency. The Trump administration has and cited various national emergencies – including US trade deficits with trading partners, fentanyl trafficking and immigration – as the reasons for the actions. But a group of small businesses have challenged the administration’s arguments, arguing they are “devastating small businesses across the country.” And on Friday, the appellate court ruled: “It seems unlikely that Congress intended, in enacting IEEPA, to depart from its past practice and grant the president unlimited authority to impose tariffs.” A US appeals court ruled on Friday that most of Donald Trump’s new tariffs are illegal, upholding a ruling from the federal court of international trade that the president’s declaration of an economic emergency to justify sweeping tariffs violates a 1977 law and the US constitution, which reserves taxation for the Congress. As our colleague Dominic Rushe explains, the New York-based US court of international trade previously ruled against Trump’s tariff policies in May, saying the president had exceeded his authority when he imposed both sets of challenged tariffs. The three-judge panel included a judge who was appointed by Trump in his first term. The split decision from the US court of appeals for the federal circuit in Washington DC addressed the legality of what Trump calls “reciprocal” tariffs imposed as part of his trade war in April, as well as a separate set of tariffs imposed in February against China, Canada and Mexico. The court ruled that the president does have the legal authority to impose narrow, sectoral tariffs, like those on steel and aluminum imports, but he far exceeded his power with the global tariffs on imports he first declared in April. The case, which is expected to be appealed to the US supreme court, hinges of Trump’s broad interpretation of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA). That law gives the president the power to address “unusual and extraordinary” threats during national emergencies, which previous presidents haver used to sanction enemies or freeze their assets. Trump, the first president to use IEEPA to impose tariffs, has claimed the import taxes were justified given trade imbalances, declining US manufacturing power and the cross-border flow of drugs. The law does not mention tariffs, although it allows the president to take a wide range of actions in response to a crisis. Trump’s justice department has argued that the law allows tariffs under emergency provisions that authorize a president to “regulate” imports or block them completely. In ruling against Trump’s interpretation of the law, the court’s majority writes: “we discern no clear congressional authorization by IEEPA for tariffs of the magnitude of the Reciprocal Tariffs and Trafficking Tariffs. Reading the phrase ‘regulate … importation’ to include imposing these tariffs is ‘a wafer-thin reed on which to rest such sweeping power.’” In one of the opinions upholding the lower court’s finding that Trump exceeded his authority, the judges write: “Under the Government’s view, the President could make such a factual finding by merely pointing to a lack of taxes paid on imports from outside the country. But if the President can declare an emergency to cut the deficit by raising taxes in whatever way he wishes, not much remains of Congressional authority over taxation.” The appeals court ruled on two cases, one brought by five small businesses and the other by 12 Democratic-led US states, which argued that IEEPA does not authorize tariffs. The US constitution grants Congress, not the president, the authority to issue taxes and tariffs, and any delegation of that authority must be both explicit and limited, according to the lawsuits. Another court in Washington DC ruled that IEEPA does not authorize Trump’s tariffs, and the government has appealed that decision as well. At least eight lawsuits have challenged Trump’s tariff policies, including one filed by the state of California. The homeland security secretary, Kristi Noem, fired two dozen “deep-state” employees of the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s information technology department on Friday, including its top leaders, following what she called an unspecified “breach” of its network by a “threat actor”. “While conducting a routine cybersecurity review, the DHS Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) discovered significant security vulnerabilities that gave a threat actor access to FEMA’s network”, the homeland security department said in a statement. “The investigation uncovered several severe lapses in security that allowed the threat actor to breach FEMA’s network and threaten the entire Department and the nation as a whole.” The statement said that Fema’s chief information officer, Charlie Armstrong, chief information security officer, Greg Edwards, and 22 other IT employees “directly responsible” were fired. “FEMA’s career IT leadership failed on every level. Their incompetence put the American people at risk”, Noem said. “When DHS stepped in to fix the problem, entrenched bureaucrats worked to prevent us from solving the problem and downplayed just how bad this breach was. These deep-state individuals were more interested in covering up their failures than in protecting the Homeland and American citizens’ personal data, so I terminated them immediately.” The firings came minutes after the department released a long statement attacking the federal emergency management agency that Donald Trump is pushing to close. “FEMA has failed Americans for decades”, the department’s official X account posted at the start of a thread deriding the agency, in which is claimed that “the Biden administration hijacked FEMA to resettle illegal aliens”. A federal appeals court in San Francisco has blocked homeland security secretary Kristi Noem from moving ahead with her plan to strip temporary protected status from 600,000 Venezuelans who have permission to live and work in the United States amid turmoil in their homeland. A three-judge panel of the 9th US circuit court of appeals unanimously upheld a lower court ruling that maintained temporary protected status for Venezuelans while TPS holders challenge actions by Trump’s administration in court. The judges found that plaintiffs were likely to succeed on their claim that Noem had no authority to vacate or set aside a prior extension of temporary protected status by the Biden administration because the governing statute written by Congress does not permit it. “In enacting the TPS statute, Congress designed a system of temporary status that was predictable, dependable, and insulated from electoral politics,” judge Kim Wardlaw, who was nominated by Bill Clinton, a Democrat, wrote for the panel. The ruling concluded: “The TPS statute is designed to constrain the Executive, creating predictable periods of safety and legal status for TPS beneficiaries. Sudden reversals of prior decisions contravene the statute’s plain language and purpose. Here, hundreds of thousands of people have been stripped of status and plunged into uncertainty. The stability of TPS has been replaced by fears of family separation, detention, and deportation. Congress did not contemplate this, and the ongoing irreparable harm to Plaintiffs warrants a remedy pending a final adjudication on the merits.” A spokesperson for the Department of Homeland Security told the Associated Press decision was made by “unelected activist” judges and claimed that, for decades, “the TPS program has been abused, exploited, and politicized as a de facto amnesty program.” Congress authorized temporary protected status, or TPS, as part of the Immigration Act of 1990, which increased the limits on legal immigration to the United States and was signed into law by a Republican president, George H.W. Bush. The law established “a program for granting temporary protected status and work authorization to aliens in the United States who are nationals of countries designated by the Attorney General to be subject to armed conflict, natural disaster, or other extraordinary temporary conditions.” The statute also made clear that it “Prohibits deportation during the period in which such status is in effect.” When speaking about the ongoing turmoil at the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), Miller says, without evidence, that the agency lacked “credibility” and was staffed by “partisan” bureaucrats who weren’t “at all concerned about public health, and weren’t actually very knowledgable about public health”. He goes on to defend health secretary Robert F Kennedy Jr, who is facing staunch criticism in the wake of firing CDC director Susan Monarez, and the resignation of several senior public health experts at the agency. “Secretary Kennedy has been a crown jewel of this administration who’s working tirelessly to improve public health for all Americans, and again, to deal with the drivers of the chronic health crisis in this country,” Miller said. Miller also claimed that Kennedy is “one of the world’s foremost voices, advocates and experts on public health”. Stephen Miller, the White House deputy chief of staff, just spoke with reporters at the White House. He said that the administration will be “prioritizing enforcement in these sanctuary jurisdictions as a matter of public safety and national security”, when asked about upcoming immigration raids in so-called “sanctuary cities”, which are predominantly run by Democratic officials. Miller alleged that these cities do not cooperate with Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice), even when an immigrant commits a crime, saying they don’t comply with detainers issued by Ice. However, the American Immigration Council notes that sanctuary cities do not “shield immigrants from deportation or prosecution for criminal activities”. In a week of chaos at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Donald Trump’s health secretary, Robert F Kennedy Jr, has continued to make questionable medical and health claims – and has been slammed for them by experts and lawmakers alike. After the deadly mass school shooting in Minneapolis this week where two children were killed and 17 others injured, Kennedy suggested that psychiatric drugs may be contributing to the rise in gun violence across the country. During an appearance on Fox &amp; Friends, the host Brian Kilmeade asked Kennedy if the health department was investigating whether medications used to treat gender dysphoria might be linked to school shootings. According to court documents reviewed by the Guardian, the 23-year-old shooter, Robin Westman, had changed their birth name from Robert to Robin because they identified as a woman. In response to Kilmeade’s question, Kennedy, without acknowledging the prevalence and easy accessibility of firearms across the US – said that his department was “launching studies on the potential contribution of some of the SSRI [selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors] drugs and some of the other psychiatric drugs that might be contributing to violence”. This week, Kennedy also suggested that he could identify “mitochondrial challenges” in children at airports just by looking at them. Speaking at an event in Texas alongside the state’s governor, Greg Abbott, Kennedy claimed: “I’m looking at kids as I walk through the airports today, as I walk down the street, and I see these kids that are just overburdened with mitochondrial challenges, with inflammation. You can tell from their faces, from their body movements, and from their lack of social connection. And I know that that’s not how our children are supposed to look.” In response, Ashish Jha, former White House Covid-19 response coordinator under the Biden administration, said: “I’m sorry but what?” “This is wacky, flat-earth, voodoo stuff, people. This is not normal,” Jha added on X. Read more here: The administration is planning to ramp up immigration enforcement in Boston, Politico is reporting, citing a current and former administration official. According to the official, the latest plans are subject to change, but would involve an increase in Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) personnel in the city. Boston mayor Michelle Wu, a Democrat, has pushed back against the Trump administration, and said the city would “not back down” from engaging in “sanctuary city policies” outlined by the justice department, including limiting city police from helping Ice agents make arrests. Last week, acting Ice director Todd Lyons also said the increase in immigration enforcement was coming. “Sanctuary does not mean safer streets. It means more criminal aliens out and about the neighborhood. But 100%, you will see a larger Ice presence,” Lyons said in a radio interview. Meanwhile, border czar Tom Homan said this week that immigration raids across several Democratic-led cities would take place after Labor Day. My colleague, Lauren Aratani, has been covering the last days of “de minimis” – a longstanding tariff exemption that let people skip import fees for small-value packages. This ended today, and leaves small businesses and postal services around the world scrambling to apply Donald Trump’s tariffs to millions of shipments. Experts say the change could mean up to $13bn in extra costs and delayed shipping for consumers as businesses adjust to the change. Here’s what you need to know. Donald Trump said he would not be spending $4.9bn in congressionally approved foreign aid, in a letter to Republican house speaker Mike Johnson. The rare move, known as a “pocket rescission”, is a request to Congress for the president to not spend appropriated funds towards the end of the fiscal year –which ends on 30 September. Normally, the law stipulates that funding can be paused for 45 days while congress considers such a request. But a pocket rescission means that lawmakers don’t have enough time to act before the funds expire. This would be the first time a president has used the provision in 50 years. It’s already attracted ire from several legislators. Susan Collins, the Republican senator from Maine who chairs the appropriations committee called the president’s actions a “clear violation of the law”. Meanwhile, Democrats decried Trump’s actions. Senator Elizabeth Warren, the ranking member of the finance committee, said the president is a “wannabe king is defunding support that prevents hunger and sickness worldwide”, while congressman Joaquin Castro of Texas said the decision to scrap billions in foreign funding was “wrong and illegal”, and urged his Republican colleagues to “say hell no”. At a hearing in Lisa Cook’s lawsuit, which challenges Donald Trump’s attempts to remove the governor from the Federal Reserve board, her lawyers said that her firing does “irreparable harm” as she’s a Senate-confirmed official who took an oath to carry out her role independently. They asked judge Jia Cobb to allow Cook to remain in her role as the litigation plays out. Cobb didn’t issue a ruling at the hearing. She will have to weigh whether the president had “cause” to terminate Cook, given the broad discretion he has under the Federal Reserve Act. Texas’s governor, Greg Abbott, has signed a new redistricting bill that will redraw the state’s congressional map to heavily favor Republicans. Abbott signed today the highly controversial bill which prompted state Democrats to stage a weeks-long walkout earlier this month. The new districting plans will remove Democratic-majority districts in several major cities including Houston, Austin and the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex. Donald Trump has revoked Secret Service protection for the former vice-president and 2024 Democratic presidential nominee, Kamala Harris, a senior White House official confirmed to the Guardian. Under federal law, former vice-presidents are entitled to receive Secret Service protection for six months after leaving office. However, Trump’s new directive cancels an undisclosed extension signed by then president Joe Biden before leaving office, according to CNN. Attorney general Pam Bondi said that federal law enforcement had made 86 arrests in Washington DC on Thursday. It brings the total tally of arrests made by federal officers to 1,369, according to the White House. The US is denying and revoking visas from members of the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority ahead of the United Nations general assembly meeting in September, the US state department has said in a statement. The US air force has said it is offering military funeral honors to Ashli Babbitt, a supporter of Donald Trump who was shot and killed by a police officer during the 6 January 2021, attack on the US Capitol. Babbitt, 35, a US air force veteran who lived in California, was fatally shot in the shoulder while she tried to enter a room near the House of Representatives during the riot. “After reviewing the circumstances of [senior airman] Babbitt’s death, the Air Force has offered Military Funeral Honors to [senior airman] Babbitt’s family,” the air force said in a statement seen by Reuters. The funeral honors would mark the latest gesture of support from Trump’s administration toward those who stormed the Capitol in a failed bid to block Congress from certifying his 2020 election loss. Trump has repeatedly made false claims that his 2020 loss to Joe Biden was due to voter fraud. He and his supporters have sought to portray Babbitt as a martyr who was unjustly killed as she attempted to climb through a broken window of a barricaded door leading to the speaker’s lobby, a few feet from where members of Congress were waiting to be evacuated to safety during the attack. An internal investigation by the US Capitol Police cleared the officer who shot Babbitt of wrongdoing in 2021 and said he would not face internal discipline. More than 1,500 people were criminally charged for participating in the riot. Trump pardoned nearly all of them, and released those who had been imprisoned. A controversial portrait of General Robert E Lee, which shows an enslaved man holding the Confederate leader’s horse, is being returned to the library at West Point, according to Pentagon officials who spoke with the New York Times. The nearly 20ft canvas, which had hung in the US military academy since 1952, was removed following a 2020 law that ordered Confederate names and tributes to be stripped from military installations. That same law established a commission to rename bases and review monuments. By 2022, the commission directed West Point to clear away all items that “commemorate or memorialize the Confederacy”. Shortly after, the Lee portrait was taken down and placed in storage. Exactly how the painting is being reinstalled without countering the legislation remains uncertain. The measure was passed in the wake of nationwide demonstrations after George Floyd’s death at the hands of Minneapolis police. Both Donald Trump and the defense secretary, Pete Hegseth, have pushed for the restoration of Confederate symbols that were removed in recent years. Hegseth, in particular, has pressed for reinstating a Confederate memorial at Arlington national cemetery that Congress recommended removing. In an August social media post, he wrote that the statue “never should have been taken down by woke lemmings”. Hegseth moved to reinstate Confederate general names at army bases such as Fort Bragg and Fort Lee earlier this summer, but did so in a way that attempted to stay within the boundaries of the 2020 law. The new names honored different soldiers, none of whom had fought for the Confederacy, yet the names were the same as those of the original Confederate honorees. In response to Abbott’s signing of the gerrymandered map pushed by Trump into law, Texas Democratic party chairman Kendall Scudder issued this statement: With a stroke of the pen, Greg Abbott and the Republicans have effectively surrendered Texas to Washington, DC. They love to boast about how “Texas Tough” they are, but when Donald Trump made one call, they bent over backwards to prioritize his politics over Texans. Honestly, it’s pathetic. I am proud of the Texas Democrats in the House and Senate who chose to fight, whether by a constitutionally protected quorum break, questioning these mapmakers, trying to pass amendments, or even attempting to filibuster. This isn’t over – we’ll see these clowns in court. We aren’t done fighting against these racially discriminatory maps, and fully expect the letter of the law to prevail over these sycophantic Republican politicians who think the rules don’t apply to them. Texas’s governor, Greg Abbott, has signed a new redistricting bill that will redraw the state’s congressional map to heavily favor Republicans. Abbott signed today the highly controversial bill which prompted state Democrats to stage a weeks-long walkout earlier this month. In a video on X, Abbott can be seen signing the bill and says it “creates the one big, beautiful map that ensures fairer representation in the United States Congress for Texas”. Abbott’s signing comes after the Texas house of representatives approved the new map – which is set to create as many as five additional Republican congressional districts – on an 88-52 party-line vote. The state senate then approved the bill early on Saturday. After the house’s approval, Donald Trump took to Truth Social and wrote: “Big WIN for the Great State of Texas!!! Everything Passed, on our way to FIVE more Congressional seats and saving your Rights, your Freedoms, and your Country, itself.” “Texas never lets us down. Florida, Indiana, and others are looking to do the same thing,” he added. The bill’s passage follows Trump’s request for the state to draw new congressional maps. Currently, 25 of Texas’s 38 districts have Republican majorities. The new redistricting will bring the Republican-favored districts to 30. The new districting plans will remove Democratic-majority districts in several major cities including Houston, Austin and the Dallas-Fort Worth metroplex. The US is denying and revoking visas from members of the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian Authority ahead of the United Nations general assembly meeting in September, the US state department has said in a statement. The restrictions mean that Palestinian Authority president Mahmoud Abbas would likely not be able to travel to New York to deliver an address to the annual gathering, as he typically does, Reuters reports. It follows the imposition of US sanctions on Palestinian Authority officials and members of the Palestine Liberation Organization in July, even as other western powers have moved toward recognition of Palestinian statehood. In a statement, the state department said that “it is in our national security interests to hold the PLO and PA accountable for not complying with their commitments, and for undermining the prospects for peace”. Officials with the Palestinian Authority, which has limited self-rule in parts of the Israeli-occupied West Bank, reject that they have undermined peace prospects, Reuters reports. Under the 1947 UN “headquarters agreement” the US is generally required to allow access for foreign diplomats to the UN in New York. But Washington has said it can deny visas for security, terrorism and foreign policy reasons. The state department said that the Palestinian Authority’s mission to the UN would not be included in the restrictions. It did not elaborate. CBS News is reporting that Republican senator Joni Ernst of Iowa plans to reveal next week that she won’t seek reelection in 2026. Ernst, 55, who has served in the Senate since 2015, plans to make the announcement on Thursday, CBS reported citing multiple sources familiar with the matter. Per CBS’s report: Some Iowa Democrats have already jumped into the race, including state Sen. Zach Wahls, state Rep. Josh Turek, and Des Moines School Board chairwoman Jackie Norris. Ernst has been evasive about whether she would run for a third term in 2026, but in public remarks earlier this month, predicted continued GOP control of Iowa. “Every day we get a new Democratic member of the House or Senate that decides to run for this Senate seat — bring it on,” she said at a meeting of the Westside Conservative Club. “Bring it on, folks. Because I tell you, at the end of the day, Iowa is going to be red.” White House officials had hoped Ernst would run again, instead of joining other Republicans who are leaving the Senate, including North Carolina’s Thom Tillis, Alabama’s Tommy Tuberville and Kentucky’s Mitch McConnell. In a rebuttal, Abbe Lowell, Cook’s lawyer, offers a stern indictment of Trump’s basis for “cause”. “Any reason is now cause,” Lowell says. “That could possibly mean the president decides it was cause because Governor Cook decides to attend to a meeting in a pant suit instead of a dress, and he didn’t think that has enough respect for the institution. That’s cause.” Trump’s lawyer is citing case precedent now when it comes the question of Cook’s firing doing “irreparable harm”. “The harm of having a somebody in office who was wrongfully there outweighs the harm of somebody being wrongfully removed from office,” he says. The lawyer for the administration is going back-and-forth with Judge Cobb now, arguing that Cook has, in fact, had the opportunity to respond to Bill Pulte’s allegations. “No response, no intent, no letter saying: ‘hey, I disagree with this’,” Trump’s lawyers say. We’re now hearing from Trump’s lawyers. The justice department says that it doesn’t “see the argument that for a very senior financial regulatory official making contradictory representations on financial documents with no explanation” isn’t grounds for removal. Cook’s lawyer, Abbe Lowell, is arguing that her firing does “irreparable harm”. He says that Cook ultimately took an oath before Congress, and what she’s being “deprived of” is more than a paycheck, but the ability “to satisfy the oath” she took and “not to be removed from anything but cause”. He added that while this lawsuit works its way through the court, the “status quo” should stay in place: She [Cook] should not be taken out of her office. She shouldn’t be disconnected to her electronics. She should be able to participate in the meeting. She should do all the things that she did a week ago before all this started, because that is the status quo. Doctors at the US Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) would be barred from performing abortions, even in cases of rape and incest, under new rules proposed by the Trump administration. The draft regulations, which also forbid providers from counseling female veterans about terminating a pregnancy, have generated nearly 20,000 comments in the federal register from conservative activists, abortion rights supporters and female veterans, many of them survivors of sexual assault. “I am a veteran, a mother, and my abortion saved my life,” wrote Mary Dodson-Otten, a 41-year-old nurse and air force veteran who lives outside Atlanta, Georgia. Dodson-Otten told the Guardian she ended a pregnancy in her 20s after she got pregnant by an abusive boyfriend who was a fellow service member. Without the abortion, she said, “I don’t think I would have survived, whether it would have been him hurting me or me hurting me.” The rule proposed by the Trump administration has an exception that allows abortions to take place “when a physician certifies that the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term”. But abortion rights advocates said the exception was too limited. “Women are going to die,” predicted Caitlin Russell, a former US army captain who served two tours in Afghanistan and studies female veterans’ health at the University of Pennsylvania. Lowell now says that the charges of mortgage fraud are not clear in Pulte’s “middle-of-the-night allegations” on social media. He underscores that Cook has not had the chance to respond, and tell her “side of the story” in a hearing. A notable exchange here. Lowell says that “motive” alone is not what Cook’s counsel is disputing here. Instead, he says that a bad motive can “illuminate” that there was “no cause to begin with”. He characterizes Trump’s surrounding pressure on the Federal Reserve to lower interest rates as crucial context for the president’s willingness to fire Cook “on the basis of a single social media posting”. Lowell is running through the events that led to Cook’s attempted firing. Namely that the president cited Bill Pulte’s referral letter, which says that Cook “appears” to have done something wrong, when he fired the governor via a post on Truth Social. There wasn’t any “investigational charge”, as Lowell notes. Lowell says that Judge Cobb would need to determine what constitutes as “cause” in this case. Without getting into the legal weeds here, “cause” isn’t defined in the Federal Reserve Act, so the Trump administration argues the president can have a broad basis to fire Cook. Lowell argues that “cause” is the crux of this case. A hearing in Lisa Cook’s lawsuit, challenging the president attempts to remove her from the Federal Reserve board of governors, has started. Cook’s lawyer, Abbe Lowell, confirms that they’re seeking a temporary restraining order to block the president’s from firing the governor. We’ll bring you the latest developments here. Attorney general Pam Bondi said that federal law enforcement had made 86 arrests in Washington DC on Thursday. This includes a “suspected Tren de Aragua gang member”, she wrote in a post on X. Bondi added that 1,369 arrests had been made since the beginning of the federal law enforcement surge earlier this month. Per my earlier post, a reminder that we have a hearing in the lawsuit filed by fired Fed governor Lisa Cook, challenging her termination by Donald Trump. A DC federal judge, Jia Cobb, will hear arguments at 10am ET today in the case. A reminder that Cook hasn’t been charged with a crime. The president alleges she has committed mortgage fraud, based on claims cited in a letter sent by Bill Pulte, director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency. Donald Trump has revoked Secret Service protection for the former vice-president and 2024 Democratic presidential nominee, Kamala Harris, according to a letter obtained by CNN, and confirmed to the Guardian by a senior White House official. The letter, dated on Thursday and titled “Memorandum for the Secretary of Homeland Security”, instructs the Secret Service to “discontinue any security-related procedures beyond those required by law” effective 1 September 2025. Under federal law, former vice-presidents are entitled to receive Secret Service protection for six months after leaving office. For Harris, that period ended on 21 July. However, CNN reports that her protection had been extended for an additional year, under an undisclosed directive signed by then president Joe Biden before leaving office. Trump’s new directive cancels that extension. “You are hereby authorized to discontinue any security-related procedures previously authorized by Executive Memorandum, beyond those required by law, for the following individual, effective September 1, 2025: Former Vice President Kamala D. Harris,” the letter reads. All Democrats on the Senate banking, housing, and urban affairs committee have signed a letter to Republican chair Tim Scott, the senator from South Carolina, to postpone Stephen Miran’s confirmation hearing to the Federal Reserve’s board of governors – scheduled for next week. The lawmakers say that Donald Trump’s decision to fire Lisa Cook earlier this week is an “unprecedented attempt” to “undermine” the US central bank’s independence. Instead, the Democrats say the committee should “hold an oversight hearing on the legal and economic implications of the President’s actions”. The added in the letter: We have a responsibility to the American public to ensure that the Federal Reserve is making decisions that are in the best interest of businesses and households, pursuant to its congressional mandate, not based on the whims of the President. Important to note that Miran was announced as the president’s pick to replace Adriana Kugler, who resigned early from her post. If confirmed, Miran would fulfill the remainder of Kugler’s term, which expires at the end of January. If Trump’s attempt to oust Cook from the Federal Reserve board is successful, that would create another vacancy for him to nominate a governor. Hernán was at the Latin American restaurant that he owns with his brother in north-west Washington DC last week when his staff started getting phone calls and messages about Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) checkpoints in the neighborhood. The employees, scared that they might be targeted and racially profiled, asked if they could go home. Within hours, Hernán had to close their doors, and the restaurant hasn’t been open since. “Literally after President Trump brought the national guard on DC, everything stopped,” said Hernán, who requested his last name not be used due to fears of Ice retaliation. “Everything disappeared because the bike delivery guys, they’re scared. They’re not on the streets right now. My people, most of my cooks are Spanish[-speaking] and they don’t want to go to DC right now.” Hernán, who also owns a restaurant in Maryland, said he was hoping to be able to reopen in a few weeks if and when the Trump administration’s takeover of the DC police ends and immigration enforcement arrests become less frequent. But the future is unclear for him and many restaurant owners in the US capital. Already suffering from fewer customers due to the administration’s almost three-week-long crackdown, restaurants are also having to contend with staff shortages because many immigrants, both documented and undocumented, fear coming into DC and being on the streets, and some have been detained by Ice. Donald Trump doesn’t have any public events scheduled today, according to the White House. We’ll keep you updated if that changes, and also keep an eye out for any posts on Truth Social or impromptu press availability. A visit to Taiwan by two US senators has drawn criticism from China, which claims the island as its own and objects to any contact between officials of the two sides. The chair of the Senate armed services committee, Roger Wicker, and the Nebraska senator Deb Fischer arrived in Taipei on Friday for a series of high-level meetings with senior Taiwanese leaders to discuss US-Taiwan relations, regional security, trade and investment, according to the American Institute in Taiwan, Washington’s de facto embassy in lieu of formal diplomatic relations with the self-governing island democracy. Upon arrival, Wicker said: A thriving democracy is never fully assured … and we’re here to talk to our friends and allies in Taiwan about what we’re doing to enhance worldwide peace. Wicker told Taiwan’s president, Lai Ching-te, during a meeting at the presidential office in Taipei that he and Fischer were visiting to get a better understanding of Taiwan’s needs and concerns. “We come here from the United States bringing a message from the Congress of commitment, of long-term friendship and a determination that a free country like Taiwan absolutely has the right to remain free and preserve self-determination,” Wicker said. “At a time of global unrest, it is extremely significant for us to be here,” Fischer added, noting that discussions would include “security, opportunities and progress for this part of the world”. Nearly 1,000 “worker over billionaire” protests are being planned in all 50 states starting this weekend as part of a Labor Day week of action organized by labor unions and advocacy groups in opposition to the Trump administration’s policies. The actions include marches and rallies in cities such as Chicago and Los Angeles, a Labor Day parade in New York City, rallies in Palmer, Alaska, Freeport, Maine, and a planned protest at the state capitol in Honolulu, Hawaii. The protests are organized by the AFL-CIO, the largest federation of labor unions in the US, and dozens of partner organizations, including Public Citizen, Indivisible, Democracy Forward, MoveOn and Patriotic Millionaires. “This is about organic, grassroots organizing, and we intentionally wanted it to be outside of Washington DC, because that’s where the impacts are being felt,” Liz Shuler, president of the AFL-CIO, said. “Whether it’s teachers or nurses or construction workers, they’re all determined to stand up and fight back, because they’re experiencing the cuts, they’re experiencing the change in policies, they’re experiencing the attacks of this White House on their unions, and so they’re determined to make their voices heard and mobilize to fight forward regardless of what’s happening around us, no matter the obstacles.” Patty Murray, the Washington senator, has called for the Trump administration to provide “immediate answers” about reports that two firefighters were detained by border agents as they were responding to a wildfire in the state. Federal immigration authorities on Wednesday staged an operation on the scene of the Bear Gulch fire, a nearly 9,000-acre (3,600-hectare) blaze in the Olympic national forest, where they arrested two people who were part of a contract firefighting crew, the Seattle Times first reported. The fire is the largest currently burning in the state. Authorities made the firefighters line up to show ID, the Seattle Times reported. One firefighter told the newspaper that they were not permitted to say goodbye to their detained colleagues. “I asked them if his [co-workers] can say goodbye to him because they’re family, and they’re just ripping them away,” the firefighter said to the Seattle Times, adding that the federal agent swore and told the firefighter to leave. The operation sparked widespread condemnation in the state. Murray in her statement released on Thursday morning demanded information about the whereabouts of the firefighters and the administration’s policy around immigration enforcement during wildfires. Meanwhile, the White House has requested that a US military base on the outskirts of Chicago assist with immigration operations as the Trump administration plans a broader takeover of Democratic-run “sanctuary cities”. On Thursday, the Naval Station Great Lakes (NSGL) confirmed that the Department of Homeland Security had reached out for assistance, telling the Associated Press that the DHS had requested “limited support in the form of facilities, infrastructure, and other logistical needs to support DHS operations”. An NSGL spokesperson told the outlet that no decisions have been made regarding the request and that the base has not yet received any official request to support a national guard deployment. The Guardian has reached out to the NSGL for comment. In a statement to the Guardian, a DHS spokesperson said: “President Trump has been clear: we are going to make our streets and cities safe again. Across the country, DHS law enforcement are arresting and removing the worst of worst including gang members, murderers, pedophiles, and rapists that have terrorized American communities. Under secretary [Kristi] Noem, ICE [Immigration and Customs Enforcement] and CBP [Customs and Border Protection] are working overtime to deliver on the American people’s mandate to arrest and deport criminal illegal aliens and make America safe again.” The signal from the Trump administration comes just a few weeks after the president directed a federal takeover of Washington DC – deploying the national guard, taking over the police department, and ramping up immigration raids and deportations in the city. President Donald Trump has threatened to deploy the National Guard to Chicago, New York, Seattle, Baltimore, San Francisco and Portland, Oregon, to fight what he says is runaway crime. Yet data shows most violent crime in those places and around the country has declined in recent years. Homicides through the first six months of 2025 were down significantly compared to the same period in 2024, continuing a post-pandemic trend across the US, AP reports. Trump, who has already taken federal control of police in Washington, DC, has maligned the six Democratic-run cities that all are in states that opposed him in 2024. But he hasn’t threatened sending in the Guard to any major cities in Republican-leaning states. John Roman, a data expert who directs the Center on Public Safety &amp; Justice at the University of Chicago, acknowledged violence in some urban neighborhoods has persisted for generations. But he said there’s no US city where there “is really a crisis.” “We’re at a remarkable moment in crime in the United States,” he said. Senator Roger Wicker, the chairman of the Armed Services Committee and one of the strongest advocates for Taiwan in the US Congress, arrived in Taipei on Friday to discuss security as China ratchets up its military pressure on the island. Wicker, a Republican, said he and Senator Deb Fischer were visiting to reinforce the “great partnership” the United States and Taiwan had and would have in the future, Reuters reports. Fischer is also a Republican and a member of the Armed Services Committee. “We’re here to talk to our friends and allies in Taiwan about what we’re doing to enhance worldwide peace, the kind of peace through strength that Ronald Reagan talked about,” he told reporters at Taipei’s downtown Songshan airport, referring to the late US president. “We stand here to re-emphasise the partnership and the security friendship agreement that the United States has had with Taiwan for some decades.” The US Senate is due to consider next week the National Defense Authorization act, or NDAA, a nearly $1 trillion bill that sets policy for the Pentagon. Wicker said that this year’s NDAA would “add to the provisions again” when it came to Taiwan, though he gave no details. The White House has chosen a top aide to health secretary Robert F Kennedy Jr to temporarily lead the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention – an appointment that is expected to bolster Kennedy’s goals of remaking federal vaccine policy. Jim O’Neill, a biotech investor and speechwriter for the health department during the George W Bush administration, was tapped as acting director of the agency that oversees vaccine recommendations, a White House official confirmed to the Guardian. O’Neill, unlike Monarez, has no training in medicine or infectious disease science. He is a former speechwriter for the health department, during the Bush years, who went on to work for the tech investor and conservative megadonor Peter Thiel. But who is O’Neill and what does he want to do at the CDC? Read our full explainer here: Senior CDC vaccine research and public health leaders who resigned in protest told hundreds of supporters across the street from the campus on Thursday that the Trump administration needs to “get politics out of public health”. The agency is reeling from the firing of the CDC chief, Susan Monarez, but Monarez, who was confirmed as CDC chief just a month ago, has refused to be removed. Three senior leaders – Debra Houry, Demetre Daskalakis and Daniel Jernigan – resigned shortly after in protest, citing the alleged spread of misinformation under the Trump administration and political interference in their work. The staffers cheered and applauded them at the event on Thursday. “You are the people that protect America, and America needs to see that you are the people that protect America, and we are going to be your loudest advocates,” said Daskalakis to the throng. Daskalakis, who was accompanied at the rally by Houry and Jernigan, is now the former director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases and is known for his leadership in HIV prevention and vaccination programs and the Biden administration’s response to the mpox outbreak. The three, plus Jennifer Leyden, who led the office of public health data, resigned together on Thursday to make a statement about the damage the administration had done to public vaccine research, and in protest of the administration’s response to vaccine disinformation, they said. “We agreed to do this together. We’ve been talking about it for months, and the past few days, it was just escalating,” said Houry, the CDC’s former chief medical officer. “If one of us retired, it would have been a blip. When the three of us do it together, it’s more powerful and just shows the state of our agency.” She and the others are asking for Congress to intervene, to put a stop to political interference in the organization’s work. The chaos at the CDC is far from the president’s only battleground todat. Later on, Donald Trump’s battle to exert control over the Federal Reserve faces a key legal test, with a governor of the central bank seeking a temporary block on his extraordinary attempt to fire her. Lisa Cook sued the US president on Thursday, with her lawyers describing his attempt to dismiss her as “unprecedented and illegal”, and based on “pretextual” allegations. The case is widely expected to be ultimately decided by the supreme court. While it makes it way through the courts, Cook is seeking a temporary restraining order against Trump’s attempt to “immediately” dismiss her from the Fed’s board. A hearing on the motion is set for 10am in Washington on Friday. The case has been assigned to US district judge Jia Cobb, an appointee of Joe Biden. Trump wrote to Cook on Monday, telling her that he was removing her from her position “effective immediately”, based on the allegation from one of his allies that she had obtained a mortgage on a second home she incorrectly described as her primary residence. The president has spent months attacking the Fed, where most policymakers – including Cook – have so far defied his calls for interest rate cuts. He has spoken of rapidly building “a majority” on the central bank’s board, calling into question the future of its longstanding independence from political oversight. Read the full report here: Hello and welcome to the US politics live blog. My name is Tom Ambrose and I will be bringing you the latest news lines over the next few hours. We begin with news that the White House has chosen a deputy of Robert F Kennedy Jr to serve as the acting head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), a decision that comes as the standoff over the firing of director Susan Monarez has deepened, with Monarez’s lawyers claiming she will not depart unless Donald Trump himself removes her. A White House official confirmed to the Guardian that Jim O’Neill, currently the deputy secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), had been selected to temporarily lead the public health agency, giving Kennedy an ally in his efforts to overhaul US vaccine policy. Unlike Monarez, O’Neill, a former investment executive, does not have a medical or scientific background. He served as a former speechwriter for the health department during the George W Bush administration, and went on to work for the tech investor and conservative megadonor Peter Thiel. Senator Bill Cassidy, chair of the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, called on the department’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) to indefinitely postpone its upcoming 18 September meeting. He said: Serious allegations have been made about the meeting agenda, membership and lack of scientific process being followed for the now announced September ACIP meeting. Meanwhile, senator Susan Collins said she was “alarmed” by Monarez’s firing, adding: Susan Monarez is a highly capable scientist who brought a wealth of experience to the agency. While I recognize that the CDC director serves at the pleasure of the president, I am alarmed that she has been fired after only three weeks on the job. Last night I talked with former director Monarez about her removal. I agree with chairman Bill Cassidy, who heads the Senate committee with jurisdiction over the CDC, that this matter warrants congressional oversight. It came as senior CDC vaccine research and public health leaders who resigned in protest told hundreds of supporters across the street from the campus on Thursday that the Trump administration needs to “get politics out of public health”. In other developments: The president is gravely serious about running for a third term in violation of the US constitution, California governor Gavin Newsom said on Wednesday, warning Americans to “wake up” to what he described as Trump’s flagrant disregard for democratic norms. “I don’t think Donald Trump wants another election,” Newsom, a Democrat, said during a live interview at a summit hosted by Politico in Sacramento. “This guy doesn’t believe in free, fair elections.” The White House has requested that a US military base on the outskirts of Chicago assist with immigration operations as the Trump administration plans a broader takeover of Democratic-run “sanctuary cities”. On Thursday, the Naval Station Great Lakes confirmed that the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) had reached out for assistance, telling the Associated Press that the DHS had requested “limited support in the form of facilities, infrastructure and other logistical needs to support DHS operations”. The air force will provide military funeral honors to Ashli Babbitt, the rioter fatally shot during the January 6 Capitol attack, marking another step in Donald Trump’s aggressive rehabilitation of the attack. A Washington senator has called for the Trump administration to provide “immediate answers” about reports that two firefighters were detained by border agents as they were responding to a wildfire in the state. Seven people have arrived in Rwanda as part of a deal to accept deportees from the US, the Rwandan government has said. The Trump administration has been negotiating arrangements to send people to third countries including South Sudan and Eswatini, formerly Swaziland, as part of its wider deportation drive. The family of 18-year-old Benjamin Guerrero-Cruz was shocked when they found out that US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) had discreetly moved him out of California, according to California congresswoman Luz Rivas, who spoke with his relatives and reviewed federal detention records.

3) Taiwan has ‘right to remain free’, US senator says in visit criticised by China — The Guardian (2025-08-29)
   URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/aug/29/us-senators-taiwan-visit-taipei-china-criticism
   Text:
     A visit to Taiwan by two US senators has drawn criticism from China, which claims the island as its own and objects to any contact between officials of the two sides. The chair of the Senate armed services committee, Roger Wicker, and the Nebraska senator Deb Fischer arrived in Taipei on Friday for a series of high-level meetings with senior Taiwanese leaders. They plan to discuss US-Taiwan relations, regional security and trade and investment, according to the American Institute in Taiwan, Washington’s de facto embassy in lieu of formal diplomatic relations with the self-governing island democracy. Upon arrival, Wicker said: “A thriving democracy is never fully assured … and we’re here to talk to our friends and allies in Taiwan about what we’re doing to enhance worldwide peace.” Wicker told Taiwan’s president, Lai Ching-te, during a meeting at the presidential office in Taipei, that he and Fischer were visiting to get a better understanding of Taiwan’s needs and concerns. “We come here from the United States bringing a message from the Congress of commitment, of long-term friendship and a determination that a free country like Taiwan absolutely has the right to remain free and preserve self-determination,” Wicker said. “At a time of global unrest, it is extremely significant for us to be here,” Fischer added, noting that discussions would include “security, opportunities and progress for this part of the world”. The Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Guo Jiakun protested against the visit by the two Republicans, saying it “undermines China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and sends a gravely wrong signal to the separatist Taiwan independence forces”. The US is Taiwan’s largest supplier of arms. It provides the island with the latest-generation tanks, air defence missiles and upgraded F-16 jet fighters as part of its guarantee of security against Beijing’s threat to invade. China considers the US supply of arms to Taiwan a violation of commitments made to it by previous White House administrations. But US-Taiwan ties have been strained since Donald Trump took office and launched a global trade war while also pressing governments in Europe and elsewhere to spend more on their own defence. The Trump administration reportedly denied permission for Lai to stop over in New York as part of a planned official trip to Latin America this month after Beijing objected. Lai reportedly then cancelled the trip.

4) Afternoon Update: hundreds of police join Porepunkah manhunt; PM criticises Katter’s outburst; and inside the world of pigeon racing — The Guardian (2025-08-29)
   URL: https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2025/aug/29/afternoon-update-friday-ntwnfb
   Text:
     Welcome, readers, to Afternoon Update. On the fourth day of the manhunt for Dezi Freeman, Victoria police confirmed a woman taken into custody after a Thursday night raid on a property in Porepunkah was Freeman’s wife. The 56-year-old Freeman, a so-called “sovereign citizen”, is accused of killing two police officers and injuring another in the Victorian town, which is home to about 1,000 people. Victoria police’s chief commissioner, Mike Bush, told a press conference this afternoon that the woman was arrested alongside a 15-year-old male, who were both interviewed and released “pending further inquiries”. “There may or may not be charges that follow,” Bush said. He said more than 450 police officers are now involved in the search, which he described as a “very professional and coordinated operation” aided by “fantastic” assistance from locals. There have been no confirmed sightings of Freeman since he fled into the bush on Tuesday. Top news Labor greenlights contentious Robbins Island windfarm despite fears for endangered orange-bellied parrot Outback Wrangler star Matt Wright found guilty on two charges after fatal helicopter crash Damning review of governor general’s office hears claims of bullying, dysfunction and a culture of fear New Zealand fugitive and one of his children spotted on CCTV after four years on the run, police believe Western United wound up as court rejects last-ditch attempt to save A-League club Trump tariffs: global parcel shipments to US lose exemption In pictures Low regulation and high stakes mean Taiwanese pigeon racing is awash with cheating – but efforts are afoot to clean up the sport. From drugs to smuggling and abductions: the Guardian goes inside the fast and furious world of pigeon racing in Taiwan. What they said … *** “You’re speaking to someone called Albanese. We’ve got a Senate leader called Wong. Migration enriches.” – Anthony Albanese The prime minister has criticised Bob Katter’s explosive Thursday press conference where he threatened to punch a journalist who asked about his Lebanese heritage. Speaking to Channel Nine on Friday, Albanese added “except for the First Australians, we’re all either migrants or descendants of them”. Channel Nine later demanded an apology from Katter. Full Story Back to Back Barries: can the Coalition find a circuit breaker? Barrie Cassidy and Tony Barry discuss the expulsion of Iran’s ambassador to Australia and Anthony Albanese’s plan to help first home buyers. They also examine what the Coalition could do to get out of its post-election slump Listen to the episode here . Before bed read Like many people living through the current state of the world, Bec Shaw has been searching for something to offer even a brief (privileged) reprieve from the horrors, the headlines, the general sense of doom. If you’re also looking for a small break from it all, take her lead: try abandoning highbrow television and delving into the gentle, soothing predictability of procedural dramas. Daily word game Today’s starter word is: TRAD. You have five goes to get the longest word including the starter word. Play Wordiply. Sign up If you would like to receive this Afternoon Update to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here, or start your day with a curated breakdown of the key stories you need to know with our Morning Mail newsletter. You can follow the latest in US politics by signing up for This Week in Trumpland.

5) Drugs, smuggling and abductions: inside the fast and furious world of pigeon racing in Taiwan — The Guardian (2025-08-29)
   URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/aug/29/pigeon-racing-taiwain-ntwnfb
   Text:
     There’s almost nothing some handlers won’t do to win. Competitors have been kidnapped and then offered up for ransom. Others have reportedly been smuggled on to high-speed trains to get to the finish line first. Some are said to be kept hungry so that they move quicker on race day. This is the fast and furious world of pigeon racing in Taiwan. The sport is globally popular and centuries old, but few scenes are as bizarre as Taiwan’s, where the stakes are high and no scheme is too complex or crafty for some. But members want things to change. Wu Chung-ming is chair of the national pigeon racing body and his local racing association. His desk is adorned with a kitschy pigeon-shaped ashtray, near a computer mining “Pigeoncoin” cryptocurrency. Parked outside is the Tesla he bought specifically for its gull-winged doors. “At first, I wasn’t particularly into it,” he tells the Guardian. “But once I started getting involved, I met all these really passionate people who were crazy about the sport.” Wu is among members calling for regulation to address the shady sides of the sport and make it easier for rule-abiding competitors to compete cleanly and safely. Taiwanese pigeon racing originated during Japanese colonial rule a century ago, later evolving into a pastime among working-class people from outside the cities. Animals rights groups want to see pigeon racing banned while acknowledging it is deeply embedded in Taiwanese society It is now one of the world’s largest with about 200,000 breeder-trainers and countless investors, across about 80 regional clubs racing up to a million birds a year. While the demographics mostly stayed the same, it has grown into a multimillion-dollar competitive industry, with official prize pools that can exceed NTD$30m (US$1m) a season. But it sits in a legal grey area. “If it’s illegal, then please shut us all down as soon as possible,” Wu says. “But if it’s legal, then shouldn’t there be some policies in place to support us?” The chaotic combination of low regulation and lots of cash has led to extraordinary behaviour, including the high-speed rail stunt and what Wu says is a common scheme – cloning tracking chips to send a secret second bird over the finish line early. There are also methods that would probably be banned if a solid set of standards were established, such as the use of performance enhancing drugs, and trainers who separate their racing birds from its lifelong mate so it races home faster. Some trainers will even put a pigeon’s mate in a separate cage with another bird hoping the jealousy will fire up the racer’s wings. “Running a pigeon club in Taiwan is honestly tough, because there’s so much cheating,” says Wu. “There were all kinds of tricks – I’ve heard a lot of them.” Wu says he’s willing to work with welfare groups and the government to create “a healthier form of the sport”, brought out of the grey area, but the government has left them “stuck in limbo”. The government claims pigeon racing is linked to too much crime. As well as the cheating and kidnapping, there are also alleged ties in some cases to criminal gangs, accusations of animal cruelty and reports of billions of Taiwanese dollars in potentially illegal side-betting that total far more than the official prize pools. In other counties, Taiwanese police raid what they say are illegal betting rings operating out of local associations. Officials have been arrested or jailed and hundreds of millions of Taiwan dollars seized. “Gambling offences have long been a key enforcement target,” Taiwan’s ministry of interior told the Guardian, while the ministry of agriculture claimed illegal gambling was the industry’s “main source of revenue”. ‘Very competitive’ sport: at the summer sea race check-in Wu told the Guardian that his association does nothing illegal, and argues that the unofficial prize pools are not illegal. “What we do in pigeon racing is not gambling, it’s a competition prize. The government has never really given us a clear stance on it.” Kidnappings and ransoms The industry has tried to address the cheating. In the late 1990s all Taiwanese pigeon races were moved offshore, packing tens of thousands of birds on to container ships to fly a route almost entirely over the open ocean. But the format has been condemned by animal rights groups, which claim that huge numbers of pigeons are lost at sea, in races that appear to go ahead no matter the weather. Authorities say loss rates in some races are as high as 98%. The national pigeon racing body will register about 60% of birds returning home by season’s end The rights groups allege birds are often mistreated, and cruelly discarded once past their prime. Some want racing banned outright. But He Tsung-hsun, secretary general of the Taiwan Animal Protection Monitoring Network, (TAPMN) acknowledges the “culture is deeply embedded in Taiwanese society” and instead urges authorities to start with a ban on sea races and to better investigate allegations of illegal activity. Wu says of the mistreatment and theft allegations: “that kind of behaviour is terrible to us too. We want to fix that. I want to talk to these groups and say, ‘OK, if we go back to land-based races where fewer birds get lost or hurt, I’m all for it’.” Huang Nai-shun at his pigeon coop in Yunlin. His love of the sport takes every spare dollar he has, he says Pigeon racers say the loss figures misinterpret late finishers as dying or disappearing. At season’s end, Wu’s association will register about 60% of birds returning home. Handlers say improving animal welfare is a key argument for further regulation of the sport. “If races can be kept fair and clean, with no cheating and no shady characters, we wouldn’t necessarily have to rely on sea races,” says Huang Nai-shun, a pigeon breeder and racer. Huang decries the impact that crime and a lack of regulation has had on the sport. He says he has had to pay many a ransom to kidnappers for his own pigeons, and is distressed by the lack of standards for how to treat or dispose of those no longer racing. “Wherever there’s a competition, there will always be people trying to game the system,” he says. Inside his rooftop pigeon loft in Chiayi county, Huang tends his pigeons with affection. He says the racing season takes every spare dollar as well as months of early mornings and late nights for training flights. “It’s tough,” he says. “It’s all down to what you love – people only do this if they truly enjoy it.” Taiwanese pigeon-racing originated during Japanese colonial rule a century ago The path to legitimacy It’s the last weekend of the southern competition’s summer season and Wu is overseeing the pre-race check-in at a nearby warehouse. Even in the pouring rain there’s an air of excitement as a stream of mostly older men arrive carrying cages of racing pigeons for check-in. Pigeon breeder Lin Yo-zhen, 29, is one of the few people under 40 entering the southern sea summer race Race officials scan trackers and wave UV lights over wings for invisible markings. The birds are separated from their owners and strictly guarded, then loaded into a container to be sent offshore with dozens of others the next day. The handlers who speak to the Guardian push back on the criticism of their sport, and the Guardian is not suggesting that any of them are involved in illegal activity. For them, it’s not about the prize money, which they say they rarely see themselves, it’s about the thrill of the race and the payoff for hard work. “It feels like training your own Olympic athletes,” says 29-year-old Lin Yo-Chen, one of the few people under 40, registering his last three competing birds. He loves “everything” about the sport, he says, noting that the other 27 birds he raced this season are all safely back at home. Octogenerian Chen Bi-chou has been racing pigeons for seven decades. He is feeling optimistic about his last remaining racer but says he loves the sport for the community, and the tactical thinking that he believes helps keep dementia at bay. In two days, a livestream from the ship’s deck will show the birds blast out of their cages into the sea air and hopefully make a beeline for home. “You’ve put so much care into training them, and when you release them far away – sometimes in rough weather – and they still find their way home, it’s moving,” says Mr Tu, a 61-year-old retired prison guard. Chen Bi-chou, 81, has been breeding and racing pigeons for more than seven decades Eventually bird No 81 wins the season, its owner taking home official winnings of about NTD$1.2m ($40,000), from a pool of about NTD$6m. But data published by the association online reveals they also won more NTD$1m in side bets, from a total pool of NTD$148m. In other counties people have been convicted over side bets, but nationally, authorities are not clear on whether it is illegal. There is no record of any raids or arrests in Pingtung – Wu’s county. To legitimise the sport would require new legislation, the creation of a “competent authority”, strong industry self-regulation and an end to illegal gambling, the agriculture ministry says. However, there’s little sign of progress.

6) Taiwan has right to ‘preserve self-determination’, US senator says — Al Jazeera (2025-08-29)
   URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2025/8/29/top-us-senators-arrive-in-taiwan-to-discuss-security-amid-china
   Text:
     Roger Wicker, head of the powerful Senate Armed Services Committee, says trip is focused on security ties with island.
     Taiwan has the right to be free and “preserve self-determination”, United States Senator Roger Wicker has told the island’s president during a visit to the capital, Taipei.
     Two senior Republican senators known for their strong advocacy on Taiwan arrived in the city on Friday to discuss security amid a rising military threat from China.
     Wicker, chairman of the powerful Senate Armed Services Committee, and Senator Deb Fischer said their visit was to reinforce and emphasise the “great partnership” between the US and Taiwan.
     Wicker, a Republican, told Taiwan President William Lai Ching-te during a meeting at the presidential office in Taipei that understanding Taiwan’s needs and concerns was their priority.
     “We come here from the United States bringing a message from the Congress of commitment, of long-term friendship and a determination that a free country like Taiwan absolutely has the right to remain free and preserve self-determination,” Wicker said.
     The visit comes as the US Senate is due to consider next week the National Defense Authorisation Act, or NDAA, a nearly $1 trillion bill that sets policy for US national defence.
     Wicker said this year’s NDAA would “add to the provisions again” when it came to Taiwan, though he gave no details.
     Before the trip, Senator Fischer issued a statement saying she looked forward to the visit “to see firsthand how we can strengthen our posture in the region in order to safeguard American interests and our allies”.
     Fischer is also a member of the powerful Armed Services Committee, which is responsible for legislative oversight of the US military.
     Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Guo Jiakun protested the visit, saying it “undermines China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and sends a gravely wrong signal to the separatist Taiwan independence forces”.
     Beijing, which views the island as its own territory, regularly denounces any shows of support for Taipei from Washington.
     China has increased its military activities around Taiwan in recent years, including staging war games, and Beijing has never renounced the use of force to bring Taiwan under its control.
     The senators’ trip also takes place as some members of Congress – both Republicans and Democrats – have expressed concern that US President Donald Trump is de-emphasising security issues as he works on negotiating a trade deal with China.
     The Trump administration reportedly denied permission for Taiwan’s Lai to transit in New York as part of a planned official trip to Latin America after Beijing objected. Lai reportedly then cancelled the trip.
     Administration officials, however, said Trump remains fully committed to Asia Pacific security matters as he pursues his trade agenda as well as a good personal relationship with Chinese President Xi Jinping.
     The US is Taiwan’s most important international backer and supplier of arms despite the lack of formal diplomatic ties.
     On Saturday, the US-based Naval News reported that the US is considering new sites in Palau and Australia for stockpiling equipment in the West Pacific, to boost its military supply chains and enhance mobility across the Asia Pacific.
     The US also announced it is rebuilding a dock in Palau, which is one of Taiwan’s closest diplomatic allies .

7) Taipei City council in the dog house over Chinese-made patrol robot — The Guardian (2025-08-28)
   URL: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/aug/28/taipei-city-council-in-the-dog-house-over-chinese-made-patrol-robot
   Text:
     Taipei City council has come under fire after admitting that a robot dog it bought to help patrol city streets using surveillance cameras was made by a Chinese companylinked to the Chinese military. Hammer Lee, the deputy mayor of Taiwan’s capital, introduced a “new patrol partner” for the management and repair of pedestrian areas in a post on Facebook on Tuesday. “This robot, equipped with an optical panoramic survey system, can create 360-degree images, accurately locate facilities, and even automatically report missing items,” Lee said, noting its ability to “accumulate comprehensive data”. On Wednesday, an opposition councillor, Chien Shu-pei, said she had learned that the robot had been made by Unitree, a fast-growing robotics startup based in the Chinese city of Hangzhou. Unitree’s humanoid robots have appeared in the official lunar new year gala and at the recent humanoid robot games in Beijing, and its founder and CEO, Xingxing Wang, has met China’s leader, Xi Jinping. Earlier this year a US congressional committee said Unitree’s robots were “dual use” tech, marketed as civilian but also used in Chinese military drills and police operations. Chien said the council’s procurement of a Unitree robot dog had “crossed the red line of information and national security”. “[This] is no different from sending a Chinese Trojan horse into the daily lives of citizens in Taipei City,” Chien wrote on Facebook. In a statement, the council’s new works division said it had bought only one robot, via a subcontractor, as a trial for maintenance inspections, and that while it was made by Unitree in China, the camera system was developed by the Taiwanese contractor Supratech. The statement said the new works division would “prioritise clearing the security concerns before any further step is taken”. A Unitree robot mounted with Taiwan-built camera systems was displayed at a Taipei tech trade show last year. China’s ruling Communist party claims Taiwan as Chinese territory, and is preparing to annex it, by military force if necessary. In the meantime, it barrages Taiwan with near daily grey-zone harassment, espionage and cyber-attacks. Taiwan has enacted strict laws and regulations about the importation and use of Chinese technology and equipment. Comments under Chien’s social media post were fiercely critical of the city authorities. “I could instantly tell that the model is from Unitree. The Taipei City government has zero awareness on information security,” said one commenter. Another asked: “Are you collecting data and paving a way for the PLA to conduct urban warfare here?”. The Taiwanese military commentator Wang Cheng-ming urged the city government to be more cautious about using Chinese technology, noting there were domestic projects in development that could be used instead. “Crucial” mapping data gathered by the robot, which could not be obtained through satellite or photographs, would be highly sought after by China’s military, he added. Taipei’s mayor, Chiang Wan-an, asked by local media about national security concerns over the robot, said the city and central governments would be discussing the “innovative experiment”.

8) Nvidia sets fresh sales record amid fears of an AI bubble and Trump’s trade wars — The Guardian (2025-08-28)
   URL: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/aug/27/nvidia-second-quarter-earnings
   Text:
     Chipmaker Nvidia set a fresh sales record in the second quarter, surpassing Wall Street expectations for its artificial intelligence chips. But shares of the chip giant still dropped 2.3% in after hours trading, in a sign that investors’ worries of an AI bubble and the repercussions of Donald Trump’s trade wars are not quelled. Nvidia’s financial report was the first test of investor appetite since last week’s mass AI-stock selloff, when several tech stocks saw shares tumble last week amid growing questions over whether AI-driven companies are being overvalued. On Wednesday, Nvidia reported an adjusted earnings per share of $1.08 on $46.74bn in revenue, surpassing Wall Street’s projection of $1.01 in earnings per share on $46.05bn in revenue, according to Fact Set data. But investors had high expectations for the company. Some of the market reactions may be to the slight misses in other parts of the company’s business, including data center revenue. Nvidia posted $41.1bn in data center revenue, missing the $41.3bn Wall Street was expecting. “Coming off a new rally to all-time highs, being merely on the mark in terms of revenue simply wouldn’t cut it for Nvidia this time around,” said Thomas Monteiro, senior analyst at Investing.com. “Saying the stock was priced for perfection would be an enormous understatement, as it was, in fact, in need of another massive beat.” The company also said it had not assumed any shipments of its H20 chips to China in the outlook. The chip is at the heart of concerns over the repercussions of the trade war between the US and China. Earlier this year, Trump banned AI chip sales in China, a move that resulted in a $4.5bn blow to Nvidia’s finances during its fiscal first quarter. In August, Nvidia agreed to give the US government a 15% cut of its H20 chips to China in return for export licences. China, in turn, has voiced security concerns over the chips, and is ramping up production of its own domestic alternatives. Nvidia’s chief financial officer, Colette Kress, said on the earnings call that some companies have expressed interest in purchasing H20 and an initial set of companies have received licenses to purchase the chip. Kress said that the company could ship anywhere between $2bn and $5bn of H20 chips to China if “geopolitical issues reside”. Huang reiterated the importance of being able to operate in the China market, which he said could represent a $50bn market opportunity for the company this year. “We’re talking to the administration about the importance of American companies being able to address the Chinese market,” Huang said. He also said in addition to H20 being approved for sales in China to non-sanctioned companies, there is a potential opportunity for the company to eventually sell a version of Blackwell in the country. “It is the second largest computing market in the world, and it is also the home of AI researchers – about 50% of the world’s AI researchers are in China,” Huang said. “The vast majority of leading open source models are created in China. It’s fairly important for the American technology companies to be able to address that market.” Monteiro, the Investing.com analyst, said: “The reality is that without the much-needed push from H20 sales in China, Nvidia simply cannot sustain the type of growth priced into its valuation.” The company is projecting $54bn in revenue in the third quarter – which is within the range of Wall Street expectations – and said the board approved $60bn in additional stock buybacks – on top of nearly $24.3bn the company returned to shareholders in the first half of the year in both stock buybacks and cash dividends. Founder and chief executive, Jensen Huang, said production of the company’s latest AI superchip, Blackwell, is “ramping at full speed, and demand is extraordinary. “The AI race is on, and Blackwell is the platform at its center,” Huang said in a press release. Despite the initial tepid market reaction to the company’s financials, some analysts remain bullish on the so-called AI revolution, especially as major technology companies like Meta, Microsoft, Amazon and Alphabet are investing heavily in AI infrastructure. “This is further validation for Nvidia and the AI Revolution,” said the Wedbush Securities analyst, Dan Ives. “This is a very important print and guide for the broader tech world and it shows the AI Revolution is heading into its next gear of growth despite the current headwinds with China. There is one chip in the world fueling the AI Revolution and its Nvidia … that narrative is clear from these results and the positive commentary from Jensen,” Ives said.

9) Trump tariffs are reshaping old alliances as the global south plots its own path — The Guardian (2025-08-27)
   URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/aug/27/trumps-tariffs-trade-war
   Text:
     As nations in the global south intensify their discussions on how to respond to Donald Trump’s trade war, the early 20th-century British advocate of tariffs Joseph Chamberlain may hold some lessons. Like Trump, Chamberlain viewed tariffs as a cure-all and believed Imperial Preference – the system of preferential rates with the British Empire – could not only advance national self-interest but act as glue binding the British colonial alliance together. Chamberlain’s brother Austen argued that through “this mutual trade we can strengthen our common interest, we can spin a web ever increasing in strength between every portion of the empire and we can make our interests so inseparable that when days of stress and trial come, no man can think of separation and no man can dream of breaking bonds so intimate and so advantageous to all whom it concerns”. Trump, by contrast, did not initially seem to regard tariffs as a means to nurture any web or alliance. Quite the opposite – they became a raw reassertion of US economic dominance, designed to redress the US historic trade imbalances. For the most part it appears to have worked – to the extent he has been able to pick off vulnerable US – dependent economies forcing them to lower their tariffs or make vague pledges to invest in the US economy. But in the past few months Trump’s tactics are starting to produce a discernible political counter-reaction. It is premature to claim tariffs are leading to a full-scale political realignment, but the resistance shown in recent weeks by the leaders of Brazil, Russia, India and China, suggests how Trump’s tariffs might in the medium term backfire, creating an axis of resistance based on the belief that it is possible bypass the power the America’s economy gives the president. Otherwise left unchecked, Trump’s tariff diplomacy will not just weaken their economies, but destroy their sovereignty. The Chinese president, Xi Jinping, said as much following a recent phone call with his Brazilian counterpart, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, whose country is under full-scale attack facing 50% tariffs on a range of goods as part of a wide-ranging attack on Brazil that conflates issues of trade, politics and even personal revenge. “We must unite and take a clear stand against unilateralism and protectionism,” Xi said. Lula has also been on the phone with other victims of Trump’s wrath, Narendra Modi and Vladimir Putin. Modi, once seen as Trump’s great security ally, is also now facing 50% tariffs on exports to the US. He is set to visit China next month for the first time in seven years, with talks on restoring flights and boosting trade after years of tensions. Lula summed up the new pragmatism. “We will continue to sell [our products] … If the United States doesn’t want to buy [from us], we will find new partners,” he said. “The world is big, and it’s eager to do business with Brazil.” The global south’s rift with Trump is deepening because US tariffs – all implemented by a presidential executive order of highly questionable legal authority – are now being used by Trump not just to “rebalance” the $1.18tn US current account trade deficit, or to demand countries provide funds for Trump to invest in the US. Trump is now using tariffs to impose his political will on issues wholly unrelated to trade. Although President Claudia Sheinbaum denied any link between the two issues, Mexico has undertaken a string of actions against organized crime as it attempts to fight off a threatened 30% tariff. India sees the doubling of tariffs to 50% as an unfair punishment for increasing its purchase of discounted Russian oil. The decision by the Canadian prime minister, Mark Carney, to recognise a Palestinian state was cited by Trump as making it “very hard” to reach a trade deal with Canada. In Brazil, Trump is trying to stop the “witch-hunt” against Trump’s ally the former president Jair Bolsonaro, so challenging the right of the Brazilian supreme court to determine whether Bolsonaro had attempted to mount a coup at the end of his term. As part of the campaign he has also sanctioned the supreme court justice Alexandre de Moraes and demanded that planned restrictions on US social media companies be lifted. So in multiple cases Trump is trying to use his US economic leverage not just to advance US economic interests but to trample over national sovereignty. The threat of a denial of access to the great American consumer has become his diplomatic weapon of choice, wielded repeatedly like a sword of Damocles over the head of any recalcitrant foreign government. But increasingly victims of Trump’s ever escalating and changing demands are discussing whether it is sensible to continue to sue for peace – at the risk of being picked off one by one – or whether they can somehow collectively protect themselves, probably through the shelter of Brics, the 10-nation alliance forged as a counterweight to the western G7. After all the Brics economies are now home to roughly 4.5 billion people – over 55% of the global population. The Brics grouping also accounts for an estimated 37.3% of global gross domestic product based on purchasing power parity. The key question is whether tariffs and political demands that accompany them will force a change to the bloc’s character – until now an ideologically incoherent group containing countries deeply hostile to America such as China and countries traditionally friendly to the US such as India and Brazil. Lula’s thinking seems to be evolving, finding himself riding a domestic wave of popular nationalism, fuelled by anger at Trump’s multiple interferences. Until recently, Lula had been hoping Brazil’s special brand of multi-alignment could fly under Trump’s radar, said Oliver Stuenkel, associate professor at the school of international relations in São Paulo. Moreover, Lula for all his leftwing politics had been reluctant to allow China to turn Brics into an explicitly anti-western alliance, opposing the group’s expansion to include countries such as Iran. But faced by Trump’s demands, Lula is having to recalibrate. “It has made Brazil more convinced of the need to diversify, to have Brics. It reinforces the need to find new friends and to have as many friends as possible,” Stuenkel said. “Politically, diplomatically, I think the Chinese are big winners of these tariffs,” said Matias Spektor, professor of politics and international relations at Fundação Getulio Vargas in Brazil. Lula has also taken up the cause of bypassing the dollar, a longstanding goal of China that in practice has achieved little in the past two decades. “Brazil cannot depend on the dollar and the Brics group needed to test whether it can have a currency for trade,” he said earlier this month. “I am not obliged to purchase dollars to trade with countries like Venezuela, Bolivia, Chile, Sweden, the European Union, or China. We can use our own currencies. Why should I be tied to the dollar, a currency I do not control? It’s the United States that prints dollars,” Lula said. For the moment, Brazil is reasonably placed to hold out against Trump’s tariffs. The US absorbs only 12% of Brazil’s total exports, down from 24% in 2000. China has been Brazil’s biggest market, taking $94bn of products including iron ore, soybeans and beef last year. But Brazilian industries such as coffee oil, seafood, textiles, footwear and fruit will take a hit, and firms are being offered emergency government credit lines as they seek alternative markets. UBS BB analysts reckon it is even possible that three-quarters of Brazilian exports to the US could be redirected, an estimate that suggests the potential hit to economic growth will only be a maximum 0.6%. India, the fourth largest economy in the world is also facing pressure to pick a side. It insists it has a big enough economy to defy Trump, while Modi even in his third term feels he has no choice but to hold out to protect the produce of its small farmers, the chief target of US trade negotiators. Yet it is an extraordinary turnaround that India finds itself dealing with a higher US tariff rate than even China, the country that, at least until recently, successive US administrations wanted New Delhi to help contain. In a potential straw in the wind India’s government think tank NITI Aayog has proposed easing foreign direct investment rules that require additional scrutiny for Chinese companies. Another key test will be whether China is allowed to join the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), the successor to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which was abandoned by Donald Trump in 2017. Beijing applied to join in 2021 but was prevented from doing so by firm opposition from Tokyo and other members keen to avoid addressing the issue of Taiwan, which submitted its application at the same time. This week, the two countries continued to strengthen ties, announcing that they would resume direct flights, facilitate visas and step up trade, as the Chinese foreign minister, Wang Yi, visited New Delhi. Doubtless the Trump tariff war will go in phases. For the moment Trump is hailing his victories with the EU, Japan and South Korea, adding that the US treasury is raising billions in extra revenue. Nor has inflation taken off in the way some predicted, but this is a long war, in which the battle lines are only slowly being drawn up. It will be deeply ironic if liberation day ends up isolating America from the rest of the world by incentivising all other countries to trade with one another. As such it will be the polar opposite of what Chamberlain intended with imperial preference.

10) Magnitude 6 offshore earthquake rattles Taiwan’s northeast — Al Jazeera (2025-08-27)
   URL: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2025/8/27/taiwans-northeast-rattled-by-magnitude-6-offshore-earthquake
   Text:
     No immediate reports of damage, island’s fire department says, as buildings shake in capital Taipei.
     A magnitude 6 earthquake has struck off the northeast coast of Taiwan , shaking buildings in the capital, Taipei.
     The quake’s epicentre was about 20km (12 miles) offshore from Yilan county at a depth of 112km (70 miles), officials said.
     Authorities said monitoring was continuing, with Taiwan’s fire department adding that it had received no reports of damage.
     No injuries were reported.
     Taiwan lies on the boundary of two tectonic plates and is frequently hit by earthquakes.
     In April 2024, a magnitude 7.4 quake in Hualien killed at least 19 people and damaged hundreds of buildings. The earthquake was the strongest in 25 years.
     More than 100 people were killed in a southern Taiwan quake in 2016.
     The deadliest seismological event in recent decades occurred on September 21, 1999, when the so-called “921 earthquake”, named for the month and day it occurred.
     The quake near the town of Jiji left more than 2,400 people dead.
     The disaster prompted a series of reforms, including improving Taiwan’s system for monitoring seismic activity, changes to building codes, and public alert system.

11) Postal services around the world suspend deliveries to US: how will it affect you? — The Guardian (2025-08-26)
   URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/aug/26/postal-services-suspend-us-usa-deliveries-how-will-it-affect-you
   Text:
     Postal services around the world have stopped sending some mail to the United States as they ready for expanded tariffs, after Donald Trump removed an exemption on packages worth under US$800. Carriers have been temporarily suspending services since Friday to avoid delivering packages after 29 August, when they will start to be charged full tariff rates for most parcels. Here’s what you need to know about what has changed and which countries have been affected. Why are postal services being suspended? The cost of mailing packages to the US is set to surge after the Trump administration removed a rule exempting packages worth under US$800 from tariffs. From Friday, packages will be subject to fees relating to the tariff rates applying to their country of origin, making postage much more expensive. Postal services will have to cover the increased cost or pass it on to customers. Dozens of countries have suspended postal services to the US to take time to adjust to the new rules and account for increased expenses. Trump’s tariff moves had not previously impacted the mailing of packages valued at less than US$800, which were exempted under “de minimis” rules, a Latin term referring to items too minor to worry about. Trump in July announced he would remove de minimis treatment. Does it apply to all mail? Service suspensions differ by country. Many postal services will continue to mail letters to the US but have suspended postage of any package of goods worth under $800. Letters and personal gifts under US$100 will still technically be exempt from tariffs after Friday but some services have suspended all US postage of goods and others have suspended postage to the US entirely. Packages that had already been shipped to the US and arrive before Friday will not attract tariffs. Those that arrive after Friday may be returned to sender to avoid incurring fees, Belgium’s bpost said, while New Zealand’s service said it would hold the receiver responsible for all duties and taxes. Which countries have stopped delivering mail to the US? International postal services in nearly 30 countries had suspended some services to the US by Tuesday. Services in 22 European countries – including the UK, France, Germany and Italy – have suspended some deliveries since Friday. PostEurop said its members, including a further 32 postal services, could be forced to restrict shipping. In Asia and the Pacific, services in Australia, New Zealand, Japan, India, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore have suspended some or all deliveries. Online marketplace Etsy has suspended US shipping label services for Australia Post, Canada Post and the UK’s Royal Mail and Evri, encouraging users to find alternative carriers who let them pre-pay tariff fees. When will mail to the US return? Postal services have told customers US deliveries will be suspended indefinitely until they have developed alternative systems. Belgium’s bpost said the interruption would last until the US government had provided complete detail on the new import rules and it could adapt its systems to match. Australia Post warned customers postage fees would increase to account for the tariff fees and new handling fees, after it partnered with a US customs-authorised payments operator to develop its new billing system. While services are yet to determine how their fees might change, parcels will face the tariff rate imposed on their country of origin. Until late February, US customs will also accept a temporary alternative fixed fee, differing by the tariff rate of the country of origin: $80, $160 or $200 per item, respectively, for countries with tariffs of under 16%, 16% to 25% and over 25%. Why did Trump remove de minimis treatment? The change is the latest effect of the Trump administration’s reforms to US trade policy and use of tariffs as a diplomatic weapon. De minimis exemptions facilitated significant duty-free trade around the world, allowing businesses to sell goods at relatively lower prices if shipped in smaller bundles. The US received a total of 1.36bn packages in 2024 under the exemption, containing goods worth $64.6bn, according to US Customs. Online retailers including Amazon, Etsy, Shein and Temu have benefited from the rule. All countries facing tariffs will now be affected by the removal of the de minimis exemption. Trump had already suspended the exemption for packages from China and Hong Kong in May, which the White House said accounted for the majority of de minimis shipments to the US. Industry associations in the US had wanted the loophole closed for years, complaining of unfair competition from Chinese sellers. The move nearly halved the number of US users of China-based Temu in May compared with March, Reuters reported. After Trump signed the executive order in July suspending de minimis treatment, the White House released a statement claiming the exemption had been abused to export fentanyl and opioids to the US, “killing Americans”.

12) New allegations against Smartmatic executive in company’s voting machine contract with LA county — The Guardian (2025-08-25)
   URL: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/aug/20/smartmatic-voting-machines-bribery
   Text:
     The justice department is alleging in a new court filing that one of three Smartmatic executives indicted last year on bribery and money-laundering charges transferred money from a 2018 voting machine contract with Los Angeles county into “slush funds” that were originally set up to pay bribes to an election official in the Philippines to obtain and retain lucrative election contracts. Prosecutors say one of the executives of the voting machine company transferred an undisclosed amount from the $282m LA county contract into the “slush funds” in 2019, but did not say if anyone actually received bribes from the county’s money at that point. The government is seeking to prove the Smartmatic executives were part of an alleged years-long scheme to pay bribes to the election official and kickbacks to at least one of the executives from Smartmatic, which sued Fox News for defamation after the 2020 election. A separate court filing in a lawsuit brought by Fox News against LA county to obtain records about Smartmatic’s relationship with Dean Logan, LA county’s registrar-recorder and county clerk who oversees elections and the Smartmatic contract, Fox News asserts that Logan may have received inappropriate gifts from the company in the form of business-class travel and upscale restaurant meals. Logan is supposed to report vendor gifts above $50 on annual disclosure forms, but records obtained by Fox News and included in the court filing show he did not report some gifts from Smartmatic. Logan maintains he was not required to report the travel or a meal that Fox highlights in its filing. Fox News is seeking the records from LA county to support its defense against a defamation suit filed against it by Smartmatic in 2021. Last year, prosecutors in Florida filed corruption charges against the president of UK-based Smartmatic, along with two other current and former executives, for allegedly operating a years-long bribery and money-laundering scheme that paid bribes to an election official in the Philippines. The justice department has since said that the scheme involved moving money from contracts for manufacturing machines for Venezuela, where the company obtained its first elections contract in 2004, to slush funds later used to pay the bribes in the Phillippines. US election integrity activists have long been concerned about Smartmatic’s contract with LA county, due to the company’s controversial history, the founders’ ties to Venezuela and a lack of transparency over company ownership. The company first tried to get into the US elections market in 2006, but a federal investigation into its ownership and potential ties to the Venezuelan government at the time put a halt to its US ambitions until it obtained the contract with LA county in 2018. Concerns about the company and its role in US elections increased last year when the justice department indicted its executives. The new revelations about the LA county money raise even more questions about the county’s contract. Prosecutors allege the Smartmatic executives conspired for years with the owner of Jarltech International, a hardware maker in Taiwan that manufactured voting machines for Smartmatic, to overcharge Smartmatic for the systems it built and then used the excess money to pay bribes to an election official in the Philippines at the direction of the indicted Smartmatic executives. Prosecutors do not say if any LA county money actually got paid out in bribes to anyone – only that some of that money made it into slush funds that had been used in the past to pay bribes and then got paid out in alleged kickbacks to one of the indicted Smartmatic executives. The justice department declined to answer questions about the case, but said in a court filing that it has documents and witness testimony to support its claims about LA county’s money. Smartmatic itself has not been accused of wrongdoing, only the three executives. But a Smartmatic spokesperson says the justice department allegations are “filled with misrepresentations” and also says the company operates “ethically” and abides “by all laws always, both in Los Angeles county and every jurisdiction where we operate”. The new allegations are not part of charges the justice department brought against the Smartmatic executives. Prosecutors are asking a Florida court to only allow evidence about the LA county money to show a pattern in how the executives funded the slush funds and managed their alleged money-laundering scheme to pay bribes and kickbacks. After news of the indictments broke last year, the county barred the three executives from any further association with its Smartmatic contract but did not “debar” the company itself, something it can do if a contractor shows a lack of “business integrity or business honesty”. The county can also terminate a contract if a vendor gives any county officer or employee “improper consideration” in the form of travel, entertainment or tangible gifts to secure favor. But Logan’s office says it stands by its work with the company. With regard to the implication that LA county money that got into the slush funds might have come from overcharging the county, Logan says the county’s contract with Smartmatic uses fixed pricing. “The alleged actions in the federal matter are unrelated to the work performed under contract by Smartmatic for Los Angeles County,” according to a statement sent by Logan in an email. “The County has no knowledge or visibility into how Smartmatic USA used proceeds from that contract; however, the County does validate work performed and deliverable requirements aligned to the fixed price structure of the contract prior to making any payments.” The contract runs through March 2027, but has three, two-year extension options that, if exercised, would stretch the agreement to 2033. It also does allow for changes in pricing up to 10% of the contracted amounts. The three indicted executives include company president and co-founder, Roger Alejandro Piñate Martinez Jr; Jorge Vasquez, former vice-president of hardware development for Smartmatic’s US division; and Elie Moreno, who oversaw the company’s contracts. According to a company bio, Piñate, who goes by Roger Piñate, played a “critical” role in winning the LA county contract and was chief operating officer until becoming president in 2018, the year Smartmatic won the Los Angeles contract. Piñate is a Venezuelan citizen and permanent US resident, and Elie Moreno is a Venezuelan-Israeli. The company put Piñate and Moreno on administrative leave after the announcement of their indictments last year, and currently Ruliena Piñate, Roger’s cousin, oversees Smartmatic’s LA contract with another employee. She was co-president with her cousin before his indictment. Vasquez, a US citizen, left Smartmatic in 2021 in the midst of the justice department investigation. The justice department accuses him of receiving direct kickbacks for his role in the alleged scheme. Controversial beginnings Smartmatic has been dogged by controversy almost since its founding in Florida in 1999 by Piñate and two fellow Venezuelan engineers – Antonio Mugica and Alfredo José Anzola – as a network applications developer. The company shifted to voting machines in 2004 when then-Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez was threatened with a recall referendum. Months before the recall election, Venezuela’s National Electoral Council announced it would replace the country’s six-year-old voting machines with new ones under a $91m contract awarded to Smartmatic, Bizta – a small software firm owned by Mugica and his father – and the currently state-run telecom CANTV. Smartmatic and Bizta got the contract despite having no experience in voting machines or elections. There were other concerns about the deal as well: the Venezuelan government owned 28% of Bizta through a $200,000 investment in the firm, a close associate of Chávez was on Bizta’s board, and two of the five members of the electoral council denounced the contract, citing irregularity with the bidding process. A spokesperson for Smartmatic says the contract was competitively bid and that the 28% equity in Bizta was pledged in exchange for a loan that was subsequently repaid. Chávez survived his recall battle, though not without additional controversy: he and his supporters were accused of rigging the election based on an outcome that differed from an exit poll. However, after an audit of the results, the US-based Carter Center, which monitors overseas elections, supported the outcome, as did the US state department. Riding its success in Venezuela, Smartmatic tried to enter the US elections market in 2006 by using money from the Venezuela contract to buy the California-based Sequoia Voting Systems, whose voting systems were used across the US. The purchase caught the attention of the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, which launched an investigation into Smartmatic’s ownership and possible ties to the Venezuelan government. But rather than cooperate with the federal inquiry, Smartmatic quickly sold off Sequoia. The company then turned to Europe and other election markets, moving its headquarters to the UK in 2012. It won a contract worth more than $180m to supply the Philippines with more than 90,000 voting machines for its 2016 elections, with Jarltech International on board to manufacture the machines. But the company became embroiled in more controversy almost immediately after the election when Philippine authorities charged the head of Smartmatic’s technical support team and two subordinates with accessing a system on election night used to transmit unofficial results and making an unauthorized change to code. The case was later dismissed. Two years after the Philippines election, Smartmatic won the Los Angeles contract. Smartmatic hoped to parlay this win to expand across the US. But after its machines were used for the first time in the 2020 presidential primary and general election, Donald Trump, who lost the election, falsely accused Smartmatic and Dominion Voting Systems of manipulating the results to give the election to Joe Biden. These claims were amplified by Fox News and other media outlets sympathetic to Trump, and in 2021, Smartmatic filed a series of defamation lawsuits against media outlets and Trump supporters who they say encouraged and amplified the vote-rigging assertions, including a $2.7bn defamation suit against Fox News. Smartmatic claims Fox News reporting decimated its US business prospects, causing other election jurisdictions to shun it. But Fox News says it simply covered newsworthy claims made by Trump and others. Last year Smartmatic settled a similar suit against Newsmax for $40m and against One America News for an undisclosed sum and seemed to be on path to win or settle the Fox News suit as well until the indictment of its executives. Fox News has used the indictments and alleged bribery scheme to support its defense in the defamation suit, saying in court documents that if the company has had trouble expanding its business in the US, it’s due to these allegations and the company’s troubled history, not Fox News reporting. The charges Prosecutors from the southern district of Florida allege that the three Smartmatic executives and Jarltech owner Andy Wang engaged in a years-long conspiracy to overcharge the Philippines government for voting machines, then used the fraudulently obtained funds to pay more than $1m in kickbacks to Juan Andres Bautista – chair of the Philippine elections commission at the time – to win and retain a contract to supply systems for the 2016 elections there. Jarltech allegedly overcharged the Philippines government $10-$50 per voting machine in “extra” or “rush” fees, amassing about $6m in a slush fund to pay the bribes. Wang allegedly managed the funds in Hong Kong bank accounts, and Smartmatic executives directed the payments, using bogus purchasing agreements, shell companies and banks in Europe, Asia and the US. Bautista passed the money to a family member who then bought a condo in San Francisco, prosecutors say. Wang did not respond to questions from the Guardian. The justice department investigation began after Bautista’s estranged wife told Philippine authorities in 2017 that her husband had $20m in “unexplained wealth” and provided them with 35 passbooks for offshore bank accounts in Bautista’s name. Bautista resigned as chair of the election commission two months later, and in 2023, news broke that the justice department had filed charges against him and was investigating unnamed Smartmatic executives as well. But the scheme didn’t start with the Philippines. Prosecutors say the conspirators had also inflated the cost of voting machines manufactured for Venezuela showing a pattern of illegal activity. In 2019, prosecutors say Piñate also transferred ownership of an upscale home in Caracas to Tibisay Lucena Ramírez, then president of the Venezuelan National Electoral Council, to secure her assistance with its business interests in that country. A Smartmatic spokesperson calls the house claim “untethered from reality”. She says Smartmatic “ceased all operations in Venezuela in August 2017 after blowing the whistle on the government and has never sought to secure business there again”. In 2017, Smartmatic accused the Venezuelan electoral council and the Nicolás Maduro regime of manipulating voter turnout numbers and election results and ceased business in the country. But prosecutors say Piñate hoped to repair the relationship with Venezuela with Ramírez’s help and gave her the Caracas home as a bribe. Ramírez died in 2023. Los Angeles county The federal case against Smartmatic executives and the company’s lawsuit against Fox News have now become intertwined due to the new allegations about the LA county money and questions about whether the executives used bribes to win favor around the county contract. Fox News says in its recent filing against LA county that it “does not yet have evidence that slush fund payments or real estate title transfers were made to any L.A. County official”, but it says that gifts Logan received from the company follow “patterns of misconduct” that prosecutors have alleged occurred in other countries, and that Logan cultivated an unusually close relationship with Smartmatic executives that went “well beyond typical business relationships.” Logan took a nine-day trip to the Maldives and Taiwan in July 2019 that was partially funded by Smartmatic, including business-class air fare, accommodations and meals, according to text messages obtained by Fox News and included in its court filing. The Maldives portion was covered by an organization that invited Logan to speak there, but Smartmatic paid for Logan’s travel to Taiwan. Based on another text message not included in the court filing but seen by the Guardian, Smartmatic played a role in coordinating the conference invitation to Logan as well. Logan’s wife accompanied him on the trip, but the text messages indicate he gave his credit card number to Smartmatic to cover her $5,000 air fare. Logan and his wife tacked on tourist activity to the Taiwan portion of their trip, and it’s not clear how much Smartmatic paid for the entire excursion. Under California Fair Political Practices Commission regulations, gifts to state and local officials from a single source were limited to $500 a year when Logan took the trip. Smartmatic would not say how much it paid for the Taiwan trip, citing ongoing litigation. An LA county spokesperson said in an email that the Taiwan trip was not a gift but a work trip to conduct oversight of the manufacturing process – the trip included a visit to Jarltech, the subcontractor that was making the hardware for LA county’s machines. The spokesperson wrote: “the lead from the County’s VSAP design contractor was also part of the trip, which included detailed reviews and presentations of products that required approval prior to manufacturing, and onsite visits to multiple product and manufacturing assembly plants/operations.” Approval of the manufacturing process was required as part of the contract, he says, and “protocols for notification and approval of the travel were followed and are documented in the responsive records provided [to Fox News]”. Asked why the project manager for the contract, whose job is “inspecting any and all tasks, deliverables, goods, services, or other work provided by or on behalf of the Contractor” didn’t visit the Jarltech facilities instead of Logan, spokesperson Michael Sanchez said that as chief elections official “Logan had and continues to have clear responsibility for ensuring contract compliance.” Fox News disputes that the travel was covered under the contract, noting that the contract only mentions paying travel expenses if county officials are auditing financial records related to Smartmatic’s contract with the county and have to travel outside the county to view the company’s financial records. Sanchez says the paragraph addressing travel expenses “is not limited to the inspection of financial records for a financial audit” but includes travel to “examine … any pertinent transaction, activity, or record” relating to the contract. In addition to the Taiwan travel, Fox News says Smartmatic paid for an unknown number of meals in upscale restaurants for Logan, at least one of which Logan did not report on annual disclosure form in 2022. In a deposition in the lawsuit Fox has filed against LA county to obtain Logan’s records, Logan disputes that he was required to report the meal because he says it was a personal meal with a Smartmatic employee. He also rejects the suggestion that Smartmatic won its contract out of favoritism. “The contract between Los Angeles County and Smartmatic USA was competitively bid, evaluated, and awarded in compliance with the County’s open competitive public procurement processes,” Logan wrote in an email. The article and headline have been amended on 25 August 2025 to reflect that money transfer allegations concerning LA county involve only one of the indicted Smartmatic executives. It has been further amended to clarify that prosecutors allege bribes from the purported slush funds were distributed to a Philippine election official only, and not to Venezuelan election officials.

13) Heatwaves are making people age faster, study suggests — The Guardian (2025-08-25)
   URL: https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2025/aug/25/heatwaves-making-people-age-faster-study-suggests
   Text:
     Repeated exposure to heatwaves is accelerating ageing in people, according to a study. The impact is broadly comparable with the damage smoking, alcohol use, poor diet or limited exercise can have on health, the researchers said. Extreme temperatures are increasingly common owing to the climate crisis, potentially causing widespread and long-lasting damage to the health of billions, the scientists warned. The research represents a “paradigm shift” in the understanding of the extent and severity of heat’s impact on our health, which can be lifelong, according to one expert. It was already known that heatwaves cause short-term spikes in early deaths with, for example, almost 600 premature deaths linked to a June heatwave in England. But the new analysis is one of the first to assess the longer-term impact. The researchers followed 25,000 people in Taiwan for 15 years and compared their exposure to heatwaves with their biological age, a measure of overall health. They found, for example, that biological age increased by about nine days for people who experienced four more heatwave days over a two-year period. Manual workers, who tend to spend more time outside, were strongly affected, with their biological age increasing by 33 days. While the increase in biological age may seem quite small, the scientists noted that this was only over a two-year period. They are investigating the impact of heatwaves on ageing over people’s entire lifetimes. The researchers also said that the total impact on populations around the world would be large, because everyone suffers during heatwaves, and higher biological age is a strong predictor of increased risk of death. “If heatwave exposure accumulates for several decades, the health impact will be much greater than we have reported,” said Dr Cui Guo, at the University of Hong Kong, who led the research. “Heatwaves are also becoming more frequent and lasting longer so the health impacts could be much greater [in the future].” Fossil fuel burning, the main cause of the climate crisis, reached record levels in 2024. Prof Paul Beggs, at Macquarie University in Sydney, Australia, and not part of the research team, said: “Many of us have experienced heatwaves and survived unscathed – or so we thought. [This research] now shows that exposure to heatwaves affects the rate at which we age.” He added: “In 2024, [scientists] discovered that early life heat exposure negatively impacts brain white matter development in children. Coupled with the new finding that heatwave exposure accelerates ageing in adults, we have a paradigm shift in our comprehension of the extent and gravity of heat’s impact on our health. The impact can occur at any age and can be lifelong.” The new research, published in the journal Nature Climate Change, used the results of a series of medical tests, including blood pressure, inflammation, cholesterol, and lung, liver and kidney function, to determine the biological age of each person in the study. The researchers compared this with the actual age of each person to see if their exposure to heatwaves was linked to faster ageing. They found the total number of heatwave days experienced had the biggest impact on accelerated ageing. Why prolonged high temperatures cause faster ageing is not known, but damage to DNA is likely to be part of the reason. Analysis showed that the harmful effect of heatwaves lessened over time, but remained significant. This suggests people were increasingly taking steps to cope with the heat, such as spending more time in the shade and using air conditioning where available. The 25,000 adults in the study were all part of a paid-for health management plan and were on average younger, healthier and more educated than the general population. Older and sicker people are more vulnerable to heat, so the impact on ageing is likely to be larger than found in the study. The study took into account people’s weight, smoking and exercise habits, and any pre-existing conditions such as diabetes and cancer, as well as the overall use of air conditioning in their neighbourhood. But data on potentially relevant factors such as time spent outdoors, coolness of housing and individual air conditioner use was not available, with the researchers saying further investigation was needed. Beggs said the results of the study were broadly consistent with those from a recent US study that showed outdoor heat accelerated ageing among older adults. Another US analysis, from 2023, found that “high exposure to extreme heat was associated with faster cognitive decline for [Black people] and residents of poor neighbourhoods”.


[UN]
No UN results found.
